<div class="trnote">
<p class="transnote">
Transcriber’s Notes
</p>
<p>
The original spelling and punctuation were mostly preserved. In 
“Interim”,
Dorothy Richardson experimented with punctuation, in particular leaving 
out many
commas and quotation marks, in order to promote “creative 
collaboration” with the reader.
Therefore, punctuation was mostly left unchanged, as was the varying 
usage of hyphens
and ellipses.
</p>
<p>
A few obvious typographical and formatting errors were silently 
corrected. Further careful
corrections, some after consulting other editions, are listed here 
(before/after):
</p>
<ul>
<li>
... was no need to have brought <span class="underline">in</span> home. 
It was ...<br/>
... was no need to have brought <a href="#corr-6" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">it</span></a> home. It was ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">Moskowski’s</span> Serenade sounded 
fearfully pathetic; ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-8" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Moszkowski’s</span></a> Serenade sounded 
fearfully pathetic; ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">Who</span> were they afraid of shocking 
with their ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-12" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Whom</span></a> were 
they afraid of shocking with their ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... and her difficulties remained.... One had <span class="underline">told</span> ...<br/>
... and her difficulties remained.... One had <a href="#corr-18" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">told it</span></a> ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... lost in the thick <span class="underline">turkey</span> carpeting 
of the waiting-room ...<br/>
... lost in the thick <a href="#corr-19" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Turkey</span></a> carpeting of the waiting-room 
...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... himself, in every <span class="underline">tone</span> listening, in 
the very ...<br/>
... himself, in every <a href="#corr-22" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">one</span></a> listening, in the very ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
 (multiple cases)<br/>
... maliciously towards Mrs. <span class="underline">Barlow</span> were 
a hard ...<br/>
... maliciously towards Mrs. <a href="#corr-30" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Barrow</span></a> were a hard ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">liking</span> and determined not to be 
reminded of ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-32" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">liking it</span></a> and 
determined not to be reminded of ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... welcome me inside again soon. Je <span class="underline">me’en</span> fiche. ...<br/>
... welcome me inside again soon. Je <a href="#corr-35" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">m’en</span></a> fiche. ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... both <span class="underline">battreurs des pavés</span>, she 
thought; both ...<br/>
... both <a href="#corr-36" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">batteurs de 
pavé</span></a>, she thought; both ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">elf</span> untouched and always new, her 
old free ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-37" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">self</span></a> 
untouched and always new, her old free ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... an old gossip. Old men are worse gossips <span class="underline">then</span> ...<br/>
... an old gossip. Old men are worse gossips <a href="#corr-39" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">than</span></a> ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... was unreal, as easy <span class="underline">a</span> dream. All 
about her were ...<br/>
... was unreal, as easy <a href="#corr-41" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">as 
a</span></a> dream. All about her were ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">was</span> hotel; Edwards daylight Family 
Hotel ... ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-45" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">was a</span></a> hotel; 
Edwards daylight Family Hotel ... ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... makes the whole day <span class="underline">and</span> adventure 
even if you’re ...<br/>
... makes the whole day <a href="#corr-48" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">an</span></a> adventure even if you’re ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... “Have you ever been to one<span class="underline">.</span>” ...<br/>
... “Have you ever been to one<a href="#corr-53" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">?</span></a>” ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... to <span class="underline">chose</span>. That’s the trouble. 
If you are liking ...<br/>
... to <a href="#corr-56" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">choose</span></a>. 
That’s the trouble. If you are liking ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... not think it wonderful ... ...<br/>
... not think it wonderful<a href="#corr-57" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">?</span></a> ... ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... when you come. We’ll read it, he <span class="underline">sat</span> smiling to ...<br/>
... when you come. We’ll read it, he <a href="#corr-58" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">said</span></a> smiling to ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... and brushed at her <span class="underline">shirt</span>. Miriam 
waited, ...<br/>
... and brushed at her <a href="#corr-62" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">skirt</span></a>. Miriam waited, ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... “Well you know I’ve a great regard for <span class="underline">youl</span> ...<br/>
... “Well you know I’ve a great regard for <a href="#corr-63" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">you,</span></a> ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... went indifferent to any grouped faces <span class="underline">of 
either</span> ...<br/>
... went indifferent to any grouped faces <a href="#corr-64" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">either</span></a> ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... be as free and indiscreet as one <span class="underline">choses</span> ... ...<br/>
... be as free and indiscreet as one <a href="#corr-65" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">chooses</span></a> ... ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... printed <span class="underline">astericks</span> between small groups of lines. ...<br/>
... printed <a href="#corr-68" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">asterisks</span></a> between small groups of lines. ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... <span class="underline">It</span> she were not pressed she would say no ...<br/>
... <a href="#corr-71" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">If</span></a> she were not pressed she would say no ...<br/>
</li>
<li>
... “Rodkin and <span class="underline">Helsing’s</span> and <span class="underline">Gunners</span> out all ...<br/>
... “Rodkin and <a href="#corr-72" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Helsing</span></a> and <a href="#corr-73" class="pginternal"><span class="underline">Gunner’s</span></a> out all ...<br/>
</li>
</ul>
</div>