<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-1">
CHAPTER I
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> thumped her Gladstone bag down
on to the doorstep. Stout boots hurried
along the tiled passage and the door opened
on Florrie in her outdoor clothes smiling brilliantly
from under the wide brim of a heavily
trimmed hat. Grace in a large straight green
dress appeared beside her from the open dining-room
door. Miriam finished her cadenza with the
door knocker while Florrie bent to secure her bag
saying on a choke of laughter, <em>come</em> in. You’ve
just been out, said Miriam listening to Grace’s
soothing reproaches for her lateness. Shall I come
in or shall I burst into tears and sit down on the
doorstep? Florrie laughed aloud, standing with
the bag. Bring her <em>in</em> scolded Mrs. Philps from
the dining-room door. Grace took her by the
arm and drew her along the passage. I’m one
<a class="pagenum" title="2" id="page-2"/>
mass of mud.—Never mind the mud, come in
out of the rain, scolded Mrs. Philps backing
towards the fire, you must be worn out.—No,
I don’t feel tired now I’m here, oh what a heavenly
fire. Miriam heard the front door shut with a
shallow suburban slam and got herself round the
supper table to stand with Mrs. Philps on the
hearthrug and smile into the fire. Mrs. Philps
patted her arm and cheek. Is the door really
shut O’Hara said Miriam turning to Florrie coming
into the room. Of course it is, choked Florrie
coming to the hearthrug to pat her;—I’ll put
the chain up if you like.—Sit down and rest before
you go upstairs said Mrs. Philps propelling her
gently backwards into the largest of the velvet
armchairs. Its back sloped away from her; the
large square cushion bulging out the lower half
of the long woollen antimacassar prevented her
from getting comfortably into the chair. She
sat on the summit of the spring and said it was
not cold. Wouldn’t you like to come up before
supper suggested Grace in answer to her uneasy
gazing into the fire. Well I feel rather grubby.
Give her some hot water murmured Mrs. Philps
taking up the Daily Telegraph. Grace preceded
her up the little staircase carrying her bag. Will
<a class="pagenum" title="3" id="page-3"/>
you have your milk hot or cold Miriam? called
Florrie from below—Oh, hot I think please, I
shan’t be a <em>second</em> said Miriam into the spare
room, hoping to be left. Grace turned up the
gas. M-m darling she murmured with timid
gentle kisses, I’m so glad you have come. So am <em>I</em>.
It’s glorious to be safely here ... I shan’t be
a second. I’ll come down as I am and appear
radiant to-morrow—You’re <em>always</em> 
radiant—I’m
simply grubby; I’ve worn this blouse all the
week; <em>oh</em> bliss, hot water. Sit on the rocking
chair while I ablute; unpack my bag—D’you
mind if I don’t Miriam darling? Aunt and I
called on the Unwins to-day and I haven’t put
my hat by yet. We’ve got three clear days—All
right, oh my dear you don’t know how glad I am
I’m here—Grace came back murmuring from
the door to repeat the gentle kisses. When the
door was shut the freshness and quietude of the
room enfolded Miriam, smoothing away grubbiness
and fatigue. Opening her Gladstone bag she
threw on to the bed her new cream nun’s veiling
blouse and lace tie, her brushbag and sponge-bag
and shoes and a volume of Schiller and a bundle
of note-paper and envelopes. A night-gown was
put ready for her on the bed frilled in an old-fashioned
<a class="pagenum" title="4" id="page-4"/>
way with hand-made embroidery. Her
bag went under the bed for nearly four days.
Nothing grubby anywhere. No grubbiness for
four days. In the large square mirror her dingy
blouse and tie looked quite bright under the gaslight
screened by the frosted globe. Her hair
had been flattened by her hat becomingly over the
broad top of her head, and its mass pushed down
in a loose careless bundle with good chance curves
reaching low on to her neck. She poured the hot
water into one of the large cream-coloured basins,
her eye running round the broad gilt-edged band
ornamenting its rim over the gleaming marble
cover of the washstand, the gleaming tiles facing
her beyond the rim of the basin, the highly
polished woodwork above the tiles. She snuffed
freshness everywhere. While the fresh unscented
curdiness of the familiar Broom soap went over
her face and wrists and hands she began to hunger
for the clean supper, for the fresh night in the
freshness of the large square bed, for the clean
solid leisurely breakfast. Pushing back her hair
she sponged the day from her face sousing
luxuriously in the large basin and listening to
Grace moving slowly about upstairs. Seizing a
towel she ran up the little single flight and stood
<a class="pagenum" title="5" id="page-5"/>
towelling inside Grace’s door. Hullo pink-face,
laughed Grace tenderly, smoothing tissue paper
into a large hat box—I say it must be an
<em>enormous</em> one—It is; it’s huge smiled 
Grace—You
must show it to me to-morrow—Miriam
ran downstairs and back to the mirror in her room
to look at her clean untroubled face. Don’t run
about the house, come down to supper, called
Florrie from below.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Have they brought the sausages, asked Mrs.
Philps acidly.
</p>
<p>
Yes, scowled Florrie.
</p>
<p>
Don’t forget to tell Christine how we like them
done, said Grace frowning anxiously. Miriam
took her eyes from the protruding eyes of the
Shakespeare on the wall opposite, and shut away
within her her sharp sense of the many things
ranged below him on the mantlepiece behind
Florrie, the landscape on one side of him, the
picture of Queen Victoria leaning on a walking
stick between two Hindu servants, receiving an
address, on the other side, the Satsuma vases and
bowls on the sideboard behind Mrs. Philps, the
little sharp bow of narrow curtain-screened
<a class="pagenum" title="6" id="page-6"/>
windows behind Grace, the clean gleam on
everything.
</p>
<p>
Chris<em>tine</em>?
</p>
<p>
Oh yes, didn’t you know? She’s been with
us a month—
</p>
<p>
What became of Amelia?
</p>
<p>
Oh we had to let her go. She got fat and
lazy.
</p>
<p>
They all do! they’re all the same—Go on
Miriam.
</p>
<p>
—Well, said Miriam from the midst of her
second helping—they both listened, and the
steps came shambling up their stairs—and they
heard the man collapse with a groan against their
door. They waited and, well, all at once the man,
well, they heard him being violently <em>ill</em>—Oh
<em>Miriam</em>—Yes; wasn’t it awful? and then a
feeble voice like a chant—a-a-a-ah-oo—oo-oo-oo
kom, and hailpemee—<em>Oh</em> Meester Bell, kom, oh, I
am <em>freezing</em> to death, <em>what</em> a pity what a 
pity—and
then silence. She fed rapidly, holding them
all silently eager for her voice again to fill out the
spaces of their room—For about half an hour
they heard him break out, every few minutes, <em>oh</em>
Meester Bell, dear pretty Mr. Bell kom. I am
freezing to death whatta pity—whattapity.
<a class="pagenum" title="7" id="page-7"/>
The Brooms sat breaking one against the other
into fresh laughter. Miriam ate rapidly glancing
from face to face. What-eh-pitie—what-eh-pitie
she moaned. Can’t you hear him? Grace
choked and sneezed and drank a little milk. They
were all still slowly and carefully eating their
first helping.—You do come across some funny
people said Mrs. Philps mopping her eyes and
dimpling and sighing upon the end of her laughter.
<em>I</em> didn’t come across him. It was at Mag’s
and Jan’s boarding house. Mrs. Philps had not
begun to listen at the beginning. But Grace and
Florrie saw the whole thing clearly. Mrs. Philps
did not remember who Mag and Jan were. She
would not unless one told her all about their
circumstances and their parents. Florrie’s face
was preparing a question. Then they must have—went
on Miriam. There was a subdued ring
at the front door bell.—There’s Christine
shall we have her in to change the plates aunt,
frowned Florrie.—No let ’er changer dress. We
can put the plates on the sideboard—Then they
must both have gone to sleep again, said Miriam
when Florrie returned from letting Christine in—because
they did not hear him go downstairs
and he wasn’t there in the morning—A good
<a class="pagenum" title="8" id="page-8"/>
thing I should think, observed Mrs. Philps. He
wasn’t there said Miriam cheerfully—er—not in
<em>person</em>. Oh <em>Miriam</em>, protested Grace hysterically.
<em>Oh—oh</em>—cried the others. Miriam watched
the second course appearing from the sideboard—she
greeted the blancmange and jam with a
soft shout, feeling as hungry as when supper had
begun. Isn’t she <em>rude</em> chuckled Florrie, putting
down a plate of bananas and a small dish of
chocolates. Ooo-<em>ooo</em> squealed Miriam—Be quiet
and behave yourself and begin on that said Grace
giving her a plate of blancmange. Oh yes and
<em>then</em> said Miriam inspired to remember more of
her story—it all came out. He must have got
down somehow to his room in the morning. But
he lay on the floor—he told them at dinner—all
of mee could not find thee bed at once!—Oh-oh-oh—He
had been—she cried raising her
voice above the tumult—to a birthday party;
twenty-seex wheeskies and sodahs....—Why
did he talk like that? Was he an Irishman?
Oh, can’t you hear? He was a Hindu. They
all talk like that. “I will kindly shut the door.”
When they write letters they begin—Honoured
and spanking sir, wept Miriam—they find
spanking in the dictionary and their letters are
<a class="pagenum" title="9" id="page-9"/>
like that all the way through, masses of the most
amazing adjectives. Why did Mag and Jan leave
that boarding house? asked Florrie into the
midst of Miriam’s absorption with the solid
tears on Mrs. Philps’s cheekbones. She was longing
for Mrs. Philps to see the second thing, not only
the funniness of spanking addressed to a civil
servant, but exactly how spanking would look
to a Hindu. If only they could see those things
as well as produce their heavenly laughs. Oh, <em>I</em>
don’t know, she said wearily; you see they never
meant to go there. They wanted a place of their
own. If only they could realise Mag and Jan.
There was never enough time and strength to
make everything clear. At every turn there was
something they saw differently. They <em>are</em> a pair
she breathed sleepily. <em>No</em>, thanks, she answered
formally to an offer of more blancmange. She
was beginning to feel strong and sleepy. No
thanks she repeated formally as the heavy dish of
bananas came her way. She wants a chocolate
said Florrie from across the table. Miriam
revived a little. Take <em>two</em> begged Mrs. Philps.
They’re so huge, said Miriam obeying and leaving
the chocolates on her plate while her mind moved
heavily about seeking a topic. They were all
<a class="pagenum" title="10" id="page-10"/>
beginning on bananas. It would be endless. By
the time it came to sitting over the fire she would
be almost asleep. She stirred uneasily. Someone
must be seeing her longing and impatience.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam lost threads while Christine cleared
away supper, pondering the thick expressionless
figure and hands and the heavy sallow sullen face.
She was very short. The Brooms watched her
undisturbed, from their places by the fire, now
and again addressing instructions in low frowning
voices from the midst of conversation—<em>Do</em> sit
down said Mrs. Philps at intervals—I’ve been
sitting down all day said Miriam swaying on her
toes—I think we <em>did</em> half believe it she pursued
with biting heartiness, aching with the onset of
questions, speaking to make warmth and distraction
for Christine. She had never thought about
it. <em>Had</em> they half believed it? Had anyone ever
put it to them in so many words? Giving an
opinion opened so many things. It was impossible
to show everything, the more opinions you
expressed the more you misled people and the
further you got away from them—Because she
continued with a singing animation; Christine
<a class="pagenum" title="11" id="page-11"/>
glanced;—we never heard anyone come in—although—(the
room enclosed her even more
happily with Christine there, everything looked
even more itself)—we stayed awake till what
seemed almost morning, always till long after the
ser-m- our domestic staff had gone to bed. Their
rooms were on the same floor as the night nursery—Christine
was padding out with a tray, her
back to the room; she had a holiday every year
and regular off times and plenty of money to buy
clothes and presents; probably she had some sort
of home. When she had taken away the last of
the supper things and closed the door Grace
patted the arm of the vacant armchair. I like
this best, said Miriam drawing up a little carved
wooden stool—oh <em>don’t</em> sit on that cried Mrs.
Philps.—I’m all right said Miriam hurriedly,
looking at no one and drawing herself briskly
upright with her eyes on the clear blaze. Grace
and Florrie were close on either side of her in
straight chairs, leaning forward towards the fire.
Mrs. Philps sat back in the smaller of the armchairs,
its unyielding cushion sending her body
forward, her small chest crouched, her head bent
and propped on her hand, half facing their close
row and gazing into the fire. There was a silence.
<a class="pagenum" title="12" id="page-12"/>
Florrie cleared her throat and glanced at Miriam.
Miriam half turned with weary resentment.—Did
you used to hang up stockings Miriam
said Florrie quickly. Miriam assented hastily,
staring at the fire. Florrie patiently cleared her
throat. With weary animation Miriam dropped
phrases about the parcels that were too big for
the stocking, the feeling of them against one’s
feet when one moved in the morning. Shy
watchful glances came to her from Florrie.
Grace took her hand and made encouraging
sympathetic sounds. How secure they were,
sitting with all the holiday ahead over the fire
which would be lit again for them in the morning.
This was only the fag-end of the first evening and
it was beginning to be like the beginning of a new
day. Things were coming to her out of the fire,
fresh and new, seen for the first time; a flood
of images. She watched them with eyes
suddenly cool and sleepless, relaxing her stiff
attitude and smiling vaguely at the fire-irons.
She’s tired; she wants to go to bed said Mrs.
Philps turning her head. The two heads came
round—Do you my sweet asked Grace pressing
her hand.—You shall have breakfast in bed if
you like—Miriam grimaced briskly in her
<a class="pagenum" title="13" id="page-13"/>
direction.—Did you have a Noah’s <em>ark</em> she asked
smiling at the fire. Yes; Florrie had one. Uncle
George gave it to her.—They began describing.—Didn’t
you love it? broke in Miriam presently.—Do
you remember—and she recalled the
Noah’s ark as it had looked on the nursery floor,
the offended stiffness of the rescued family, the
look of the elephants and giraffes and the green
and yellow grasshoppers and the red lady bird, all
standing about alive amongst the little stiff bright
green trees—We had a farm-yard too, pigs; and
ducks and geese and hens with feathers—We
used to stand them all out together on the floor,
and the grocer’s shop and all our dolls sitting
round against the nursery wall. It used to make
me <em>perfectly</em> happy. It would still—Everyone
laughed—It would. It <em>does</em> only to think of it.
And there was a doll’s house with a door that
opened and a staircase and furniture in the rooms.
I can smell the smell of the inside at this moment.
But the thing I liked best and never got accustomed
to was a little alabaster church with
coloured glass windows and a place inside for a
candle. We used to put that out on the floor
too. I wish I had it now.... The kaleidoscope.
Do you <em>remember</em> looking at the Kaleidoscope?
<a class="pagenum" title="14" id="page-14"/>
I used to cry about it sometimes at night;
thinking of the patterns I had not seen. I thought
there was a new pattern every time you shook it,
forever. We had a huge one with very small bits
of glass. They clicked smoothly when the pattern
changed and were very beautifully coloured....
Oh and do you remember those things—did you
have a little paper <em>theatre</em>? They were all
looking at her, not at the little theatre. She
wished she had not mentioned it. It was so sacred
and so secret that she had never thought of it or
even mentioned it to herself all these years. She
rushed on to the stereoscope, her eyes still on the
little cardboard stage, hearing the sound of the
paper scraping over the little wooden roller as the
printed scenes came round backwards or forwards,
and plunged into descriptions of deep views of
the insides of cathedrals in sharp relief in a clear
silver light, mountains, lakes, statuary in clear
light out of doors and came back to the dolls,
pressing alone wearily on through the dying
interest of her hearers to discover with sleepy
enthusiasm the wisdom and indifference and
independence of Dutch dolls, the charm of their
wooden bodies, the reasons why one never wanted
to put any clothes on them, the dear kind friendliness
<a class="pagenum" title="15" id="page-15"/>
of dolls with composition heads—I don’t
believe I’ve ever loved anyone in the world as I
loved Daisy—Yes, I know—we had one too;
it belonged to Eve, it was enormous and had real
hair and a leather trunk for its clothes and felt
huge and solid when you carried it; but it was
as far away from you as a human being—yes, the
rag dolls were simply funny—I never understand
all that talk about the affection for rag dolls. We
used to scream at ours and hold them by the
skirts and see which could bang their heads hardest
against the wall. They were always like a Punch
and Judy show. The composition dolls I mean
were painted a soft colour, very roundly moulded
heads, with a shape, just a little hair, put on
in soft brown colour, and not staring eyes but soft
bluey grey with an <em>expression</em>; looking at something,
looking at the same thing you looked at
yourself—.... Mrs. Philps yawned and
Florrie began making a move—I suppose it’s bed
time—said Miriam. They were all looking
sleepy.—Have a glass of claret Miriam before
you go said Mrs. Philps. No thank you, said
Miriam springing up and dancing about the room.
Giddy girl, chuckled Mrs. Philps affectionately.
Grace and Florrie fetched dust sheets from the
<a class="pagenum" title="16" id="page-16"/>
hall cupboard and began spreading them over
the furniture. Miriam pulled up in front of a
large oil-painting over the sofa; its distances
where a meadow stream that was wide in the foreground
with a stone bridge and a mill-wheel and a
cottage half hidden under huge trees, grew narrow
and wound on and on through tiny distant fields
until the scene melted in a soft toned mist, held
all her early visits to the Brooms in the Banbury
Park days before they had discovered that she did
not like sitting with her back to the fire. She
listened eagerly to the busy sounds of the Brooms.
Someone had bolted the hall door and was
scrooping a chair over the tiles to get up and put
out the gas. Dust sheets were still being flountered
in the room behind her. Grace’s arm came round
her waist.—I’m so glad you’ve come sweet she
said in her low steady shaken tones—So’m I
said Miriam.—Isn’t that a jolly picture—Yes.
It’s an awfully good one you know. It was one
of papa’s—What’s O’Hara doing in the 
kitchen?—Taking
Grace by the waist Miriam drew into
the passage trying to prance with her down the
hall. The little kitchen was obscured by an
enormous clothes-horse draped with airing linen.
She’s left a miserable fire, said Mrs. Philps from
<a class="pagenum" title="17" id="page-17"/>
behind the clothes-horse—She hasn’t done the
saucepans aunt scolded Florrie from the scullery—Never
mind, we can’t have er down now. It’s
neely midnight.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-4">
4
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam emerged smoothly into the darkness and
lay radiant. There was nothing but the cool
sense of life pouring from some inner source and
the deep fresh spaces of the darkness all round her.
Perhaps she had awakened because of her happiness...
clear gentle and soft in a melancholy
minor key a little thread of melody sounded from
far away in the night straight into her heart.
There was nothing between her and the sound
that had called her so gently up from her deep
sleep. She held in her joy to listen. There was
no sadness in the curious sorrowful little air. It
drew her out into the quiet neighbourhood ...
misty darkness along empty roads, plaques of
lamplight here and there on pavements and
across house fronts ... blackness in large gardens
and over the bridge and in the gardens at the
backs of the rows of little silent dark houses, a pale
lambency over the canal and reservoirs. Somewhere
amongst the little roads a group of players
<a class="pagenum" title="18" id="page-18"/>
hooting gently and carefully slow sweet notes
as if to wake no one, playing to no one, out
into the darkness. Back out of fresh darkness
came the sweet clear music ... the waits;
of course. She rushed up and out heart
foremost, listening, following the claim of the
music into the secret happy interior of the
life of each sleeping form, flowing swiftly on
across a tide of remembered and forgotten
incidents in and out amongst the seasons of the
years. It sent her forward to to-morrow sitting
her upright in morning light telling her with
shouts that the day was there and she had only to
get up into it ... the little air had paused on a
tuneful chord and ceased ... It was beginning
again nearer and clearer. She heard it carefully
through. It was so <em>strange</em>. It came from far
back amongst the generations where everything
was different; telling you that they were the
same.... In the way those people were playing,
in the way they made the tune sound in the
air neither instrument louder than the others
there was something that <em>knew</em>. Something that
everybody knows.... They show it by the way
they do things, no matter what they say.... Her
heart glowed and she stirred. How rested she was.
<a class="pagenum" title="19" id="page-19"/>
How fresh the air was. What freshness came from
everything in the room. She stared into the
velvety blackness trying to see the furniture. It
was the thick close-drawn curtains that made the
perfect velvety darkness ... Behind the
curtains and the Venetian blinds the windows
were open at the top letting in the garden air.
The little square of summer garden showed
brilliantly in this darkest winter blackness. It was
more than worth while to be wakened in the
middle of the night at the Brooms. The truth
about life was in them. She imagined herself
suddenly shouting in the night. After the first
fright they would understand and would laugh.
She yawned sleepily towards an oncoming tangle
of thoughts, pushing them off and slipping back
into unconsciousness.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-5">
5
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam picked up the blouse by its shoulders
and danced it up and down in time to the girls’
volleys of affectionate raillery—Did you sleep
well broke in Mrs. Philps sitting briskly up and
superciliously grasping the handle of the large
coffee-pot with her small shrivelled hand. Christmas
Day had begun. The time for trying to say
<a class="pagenum" title="20" id="page-20"/>
suitable things about the present was over. All
the six small hands were labouring amongst the
large things on the table. The blouse hung real,
a blouse, a glorious superfluity in her only just
sufficient wardrobe.—Yes, thank you, I <em>did</em>
she said ardently, lowering it to her knees. The
rich strong coffee was flowing into the cups. In a
moment Grace would be handing plates of rashers
and Florrie would have finished extracting the eggs
from the boiler. She laid the blouse carefully on
the sofa and heard in among the table sounds the
greetings that had followed her arrival downstairs.
The brown and green landscape caught
her eye, old and still, holding all her knowledge of
the Brooms back and back, fresh with another
visit to them. She turned back to the table with a
sigh. Someone chuckled. Perhaps at something
that was happening on the table. She glanced
about. The fragrant breakfast had arrived in
front of her—<em>Don’t</em> let it get cold laughed
Florrie drawing the mustard-pot from the cruet-stand
and rapping it down before her. There
was something that she had forgotten, some point
that was being missed, something that must be
said at this moment to pin down the happiness of
everything. She looked up at Shakespeare and
<a class="pagenum" title="21" id="page-21"/>
Queen Victoria. It was going away—<em>Mustard</em>—said
Florrie tapping the table with the mustard-pot.—Did
you hear the waits? asked
Mrs. Philps with dreary acidity. <em>That</em> was it.
She turned eagerly. Mrs. Philps was sipping
her coffee. Miriam waited politely with the
mustard-pot in her hand until she had put down
her cup and then said anxiously, offering it to
Mrs. Philps—they played—Help yourself—laughed
Mrs. Philps—a most lovely curious old-fashioned
thing she went on anxiously. Florrie
was watching her narrowly. That was the
<em>Mistletoe</em> Bough—bridled Mrs. Philps accepting
the mustard.—Oh that’s The Mistletoe Bough
mused Miriam thrilling. Then Mrs. Philps had
heard, and felt the same in the night. Nothing
was missing. Everything that had happened
since she had arrived on the doorstep came freshly
back and on into to-day, flowing over the embarrassment
of the parcels. There was nothing to
say; no words that could express it; a tune....
<em>That’s</em> the Mistletoe Bough ... she said
reflectively. Florrie was sitting very upright
exactly opposite, quietly munching, her knife
and fork quiet on her plate. Grace’s small hands
and mouth were gravely labouring. She began
<a class="pagenum" title="22" id="page-22"/>
swiftly on her own meal, listening for the tune
with an intelligent face. If Florrie would take off
her attention she could let her face become a
blank and recover the tune. Impossible to go on
until she had recalled it. She sought for some
distracting remark. Grace spoke. Florrie turned
towards her. Miriam radiated agreement and
sipped her hot coffee. Its strong aroma flowed
through her senses. She laughed sociably. Someone
else laughed.—Of <em>course</em> they don’t said
Florrie in her most grinding voice and laughed.
Two voices broke out together. Miriam listened
to the tones, glancing intelligence accordingly,
umpiring the contest, her mind wandering blissfully
about. Presently there was a silence. Mrs.
Philps had bridled and said something decisive.
Miriam guiltily re-read the remark. She could
not think of anything that could be made to follow
it with any show of sincerity and sat feeling large
and conspicuous. Mrs. Philps’ face had grown
dark and old. Miriam glanced restively at her
meaning.... Large terrible illnesses, the doctor
coming, trouble amongst families, someone sitting
paralyzed; poverty, everything being different....—D’you
like a snowy Christmas, Miriam?
asked Florrie shyly. Miriam looked across. She
<a class="pagenum" title="23" id="page-23"/>
looked very young, a child speaking on sufferance,
saying the first thing that occurs lest someone
should remark that it was time to go to bed.
Hilarious replies rushed to Miriam’s mind. They
would have re-awakened the laughter and talk,
but there would have been resentment in the
widowed figure at the head of the table, the figure
that had walked with arch dignity into the big
north London shop and chosen the blouse. The
weight in the air was dreadful—There don’t
seem to be snowy Christmases nowadays she said
turning deferentially to her hostess with her eyes
on Florrie’s child’s eyes—Christmas is a <em>very</em>
different thing to what it was breathed Mrs.
Philps sitting back with folded hands from her
finished meal.—Oh, I don’t know aunt corrected
Grace anxiously—aren’t you going to have your
toast and marmalade? You lived in the North
all your young Christmases. It’s always colder
there. Take some toast aunt——We used to
burn Yule logs flickered Mrs. Philps, plaintively
refusing the toast. Miriam waited imagining
the snow on the garden where the frilled shirts
used to hang out to bleach in the dew ... the
great flood, the anxiety in the big houses—Yule
logs would look funny in this grate, laughed
<a class="pagenum" title="24" id="page-24"/>
Florrie—Oh, I don’t know, pressed Grace.—We
had some last year. Haven’t we got any this year
aunt?——I ordered some wood; I don’t know
if it’s come—Miriam could not imagine the
Brooms with burning logs. Yes, she could. They
were nearer to burning logs than anyone she knew.
It would be more real here; more like the burning
logs in the Christmas numbers. The glow would
shine on to their faces and they would see into
the past. But it was all in the past. Yule logs and
then, no yule logs. Everyone even the Brooms
were being pushed forward into a new cold world.
There was no time to remember—they don’t
build grates for wood nowadays, ruled Mrs.
Philps. Who could stop all this coming and
crowding of mean little things? But the wide
untroubled leisure of the Brooms breakfast-table
was shut away from the mean little things....
Are you coming to church Miriam?—Miriam
looked across the doomed breakfast-table and met
the watchful eyes. Behind Florrie very upright
in her good, once best stuff dress, two years old
in its features and methodically arrived at morning
wear, the fire still blazed its extravagant welcome,
the first of Christmas morning was still in the
room. When they had all busied themselves and
<a class="pagenum" title="25" id="page-25"/>
gone, it would be gone. She glanced about to see
that everyone had finished and put her elbows on
the table.—<em>Well</em> she said abundantly. There
was an expectant relaxing of attitudes—I should
<em>like</em> to go very much. <em>But</em>—Grace fidgeting
her brooch had flung her unrestrained burning
affectionate glance—when I saw Mr. La Trobe
climbing into the pulpit—Florrie’s eyes were
downcast and Mrs. Philps was blowing her nose
her eyes gazing wanly out above her handkerchief
towards the little curtained bow-window—Miriam
dimpled and glanced sideways at Grace
catching her shy waiting eyes—I should stand up
on my seat ... give one loud shriek—the three
laughters broke forth together—and fall gasping
to the ground——Then you’d certainly better
not go chuckled Florrie amidst the general wiping
away of tears——I saw the Miss Pernes at Strudwick’s
on Friday; Miss Perne and Miss Jenny——oh,
did you responded Miriam hurriedly. The
room lost something of its completeness. There
was a coming and a going, the pressing grey of an
outside world—How are they?——They
seemed very well—They don’t seem to change—Oh;
I’m so glad—They asked for 
you—<em>Oh</em>——I
didn’t say we were expecting you—<em>Oh</em>, it’s
<a class="pagenum" title="26" id="page-26"/>
such an age——We always say you’re very busy
and hard-worked smiled Grace—Yes, that’s
it....—You didn’t go often even when Miss
Haddie was alive—No; she was awfully good;
she used to come down and see me in the west-end
when I first came to town.—How they like the
west-end—Aunt, I don’t blame them.—She
used to write to you a lot didn’t she Miriam?—She
used to come and talk to me in a tea-shop at
six-fifteen ... yes she wrote regularly said Miriam
irritably—You were awfully fond of Miss Haddie
weren’t you?—Miriam peered into space struggling
with a tangle of statements. Her mind leapt
from incident to incident weaving all into a
general impression—so strong and clear that it
gave a sort of desperation to her painful consciousness
that nothing she saw and felt was visible to
the three pairs of differently watchful eyes.
Poured chaotically out it would sound to them
like the ravings of insanity. All contradictory, up
and down backwards and forwards, all true. The
things they would grasp here and there would
misrepresent herself and the whole picture. Why
would people insist upon talking about things—when
nothing can ever be communicated....
She felt angrily about in the expectant stillness.
<a class="pagenum" title="27" id="page-27"/>
She could see their minds so clearly; why
wouldn’t they just look and see hers instead of
waiting for some impossible pronouncement. Yes
would be a lie. No would be a lie. Any statement
would be a lie. All statements are lies. I like the
Pernes better than I like you. I like all of you
better than the Pernes. I hate you. I hate the
Pernes. I, of course you must know it, hate
<em>everybody</em>. I adore the Pernes so much that I
can’t go and see them. But you come and see us.
Yes; but you insist. Then you like us only as
well as you like the Pernes; you like all sorts of
people as well perhaps better than you like us. I
have nothing to do with anyone. You shall not
group me anywhere. I am everywhere. Let the
day go on. Don’t sit there worrying me to death....—They
always send you their love and say
you are to go and see them—Oh yes, I <em>must</em> go;
some time——They are wonderfully fond of
their girls.... It’s one of the greatest pleasures of
their lives keeping up with the old girls—Fatigue
was returning upon Miriam; her face flushed and
her hands were large and cold. She drew them
down on to her unowned knees. A mild yes would
bring the sitting to an end.—But you see I’m <em>not</em>
an old girl she said impatiently. No one spoke.
<a class="pagenum" title="28" id="page-28"/>
Florrie’s mind was darkly moving towards the
things of the day. Perhaps Mrs. Philps and
Florrie had been thinking of them for some
minutes.—You know it does make a difference she
pursued, obsequiously collecting attention,—when
people are your employers. You can never
feel the same—Everyone hovered,—and Mrs.
Philps smiled in triumphant curiosity.—I
shouldn’t have thought it made any difference to
you Miriam said Florrie flushing heavily.—I
think I know what Miriam means said Grace
gently radiating—I always feel a pupil with them
much as I like them—Grace, d’you know you’re
my pupil said Miriam leaping out into laughter.—I
can <em>see</em> Grace—she drove on carrying them
all with her, ignoring the swift eyes upon the dim
things settling heavily down upon her heart—<em>gazing</em>
out of the window in the little room where
I was supposed to be holding a German class—Yes
I know Miriam darling, but now you know me you
know I could never be any good at languages——You’re
my pupil——It seems absurd to think of
you as a teacher now we know you chuckled
Florrie.—Aren’t you glad it’s over, 
Miriam?——I
<em>loved</em> the teaching. I’ve never left off longing
to go back to school myself yawned Miriam
<a class="pagenum" title="29" id="page-29"/>
absently.—You won’t get much sympathy out
of Florrie——I was a perfect <em>fool</em> beamed
Florrie. Everyone laughed.—I often think
now—chuckled Florrie rosy and tearful—when
I open the front door to go out how glad I am
there’s no more <em>school</em>—Miriam looked across
laughing affectionately.—Why did you like your
school so much Miriam?—I didn’t like it except
now and again terrifically in flashes. I didn’t
know what it was. I hadn’t seen other schools. I
didn’t know what we were doing—It 
wasn’t—a—a
genteel school for young ladies, there was
nothing of that in it—You never know when
you’re happy reproved Mrs. Philps—Oh, I don’t
<em>know</em> aunt, I think you <em>do</em> appealed Grace, her
eyes full of shy championship.—I’m very happy,
thank you,—aren’t we all happy dear brethren?
chirped Miriam towards the cruet-stand.—Silly
children——Now aunt you <em>know</em> you are. You
know you enjoy life tremendously.—Of course
I do cried Mrs. Philps beaming and bridling. In
a devout low tone she added—it’s the little
simple things that make you happy; the things
that happen every day—For a moment there
was nothing but the sound of the fire flickering in
the beamy air.—Hadn’t we better have her <em>in</em>
<a class="pagenum" title="30" id="page-30"/>
aunt, muttered Grace? Florrie got up briskly and
rang the bell.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-6">
6
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
They all went busily upstairs. Even Grace did
not linger.—Let me come and help make my
bed said Miriam going with her to the door—No,
you’re to rest——I don’t want to 
rest——Then
you can run round the room—She turned
back towards the silent disarray. Busy sounds
came from upstairs. A hurried low reproving
voice emerged on to the landing ...—and light
the drawing-room fire as soon as you’ve finished
clearing and when the postman comes leave the
letters in the <em>box</em>—Christine came downstairs
without answering. In a moment she would be
coming in. Moving away from the attraction of
the blouse Miriam wandered to the fireside. Her
eyes turned towards the chair in the corner half-hidden
by the large armchair. There they were,
on the top of the pile of newspapers and magazines.
Dare’s Annual lay uppermost its cover
bright with holly. Her hands went out ... to
look at them now would be to anticipate the
afternoon. But there would be at least two
Windsors that she had not seen. She drew one
<a class="pagenum" title="31" id="page-31"/>
out and stood turning over the leaves. It would
be impossible to look round and say a Happy
Christmas and then go on reading, and just as bad
to stop reading and not say anything more. She
planted herself in the middle of the hearthrug
with her face to the room. Why should she stand
advantageously there while Christine unwillingly
laboured? Why should Christine be pleased to be
spoken to? She thought a happy Christmas in
several different voices. They all sounded insulting.
Christine was still making noises in the
kitchen. There was time to escape. The drawing-room
door would be bolted and that meant
getting one of the hall chairs and telling the whole
house of an extraordinary impulse. Upstairs her
bed would still be being made or her room dusted.
She drew up the little stool and sat dejectedly,
close over the fire as if with a heavy cold in her
head and anxiously deep in the pages of the
magazine. Perhaps Christine would think she did
not hear her come in ... she guessed the story
from the illustrations and dropped into the text
half-way through the narrative. No woman who
did typewriting from morning till night and lived
in a poor lodging could look like that ... perhaps
some did ... perhaps that was how clerks <em>ought</em> to
<a class="pagenum" title="32" id="page-32"/>
look ... she skimmed on; moving automatically
to make room for boots that were being put down
in the fender; ready to speak in a moment if
whoever it was did not say anything; the figure
turned to the table. It was Christine. If she
blew her nose and coughed Christine would know
she knew she was there. She turned a page
swiftly and wrapped herself deeply in the next.
When Christine had gone away with a trayful she
resumed her place on the hearthrug ready to see
her for the first time when she came in again and
catch her eye and say Good <em>morning</em>, I wish you a
happy Christmas. Christine came shapelessly in
and began collecting the remaining things with
sullen hands. Her face was closed and expressionless
and her eyes downcast. Miriam’s eyes
followed it, waiting for the eyes to lift, her lips
powerless. It was too late to say good morning.
Sadness came growing in the room. Her thoughts
went homelessly to and fro between her various
world and the lumpy figure moving sullenly along
the edge of an unknown life. Stepping observantly
in through the half-open door with a
duster bunched carefully in her hand came
Florrie. Miriam flung out a greeting that swept
round Christine and out into a shining world. It
<a class="pagenum" title="33" id="page-33"/>
brought Florrie to her side, shy and eager.
Christine taking her final departure looked up.
Miriam flushed through her laughter, steadily
meeting the expressionless brown glitter of
Christine’s eyes. Hullo Madam O’Hara she
defended, collecting herself for the question
that would follow Florrie’s encirclement of her
waist—Hullo Little Miriam; you <em>are</em> happy
ground out Florrie shyly—are you rested?—Yes
said Miriam formally, I think I am—They
turned, Florrie withdrawing her arm, and stood
looking into the fire—Oooch isn’t it cold said
Grace from the doorway—have you done the
hall chairs?—No, I came in here to get warm
first—It <em>is</em> cold said Grace coming to the 
hearthrug—are
you warm Miriam darling?—I’m so
warm that I think I ought to run upstairs for a
constitutional and scrub my teeth said Miriam
briskly, preparing to follow Florrie from the
room.—Grace dropped her duster and put her
arms upon her, raising an anxious pleading face—stay
here while I dust sweetheart. You can scrub
your teeth when we’re gone. <em>Dear</em> pink-face.
How are you my sweet? Are you rested? she
asked between gentle kisses dabbed here and there—Never
berrer old chap. I tell you never <em>berrer</em>—Grace
<a class="pagenum" title="34" id="page-34"/>
laughed gently into her face and stood
holding her, smiling her anxious pleading solicitous
smile.—I tell you never <em>berrer</em> repeated
Miriam. <em>Dear</em> sweet pink face smiled Grace and
turned carefully away to her dusting. Miriam
sank into an armchair, listening to the soft smooth
flurring of the duster over the highly polished
surfaces—Well she asked presently—how are
things in general?—Grace rose from her knees
and carefully shut the door. She came back with
fear darkening the velvet lustre of her eyes—Oh
I don’t know Miriam dear she murmured
kneeling on the hearthrug near Miriam’s knees
and holding her hands out towards the fire. It’s
all over thought Miriam, she’s failed.—I’ve
got ever so many things to tell you. I want to
ask your advice—Remember I’ve never even
seen him argued Miriam automatically, figuring
the surroundedness, the sudden realization and
fear, the recapturing of liberty, the hidden
polite determined retreat.—Oh, but you always
understand. Wait till we can talk she sighed
rising from her knees, and kissing Miriam’s forehead.
It was all over. Grace was clinging to
some “reasonable” explanation of some final
thing. She cast about in her mind for something
<a class="pagenum" title="35" id="page-35"/>
from her own scattered circumstances to feed
their talk when it should come. She would have
to induce Grace to turn away and go on ... the
end of the long history of faithfully remembered
details would be a relief ... the delicate depths
of their intercourse would come back ... its
reach backwards and forwards; and yet without
anything in the background ... it seemed as if
always something were needed in the background
to give the full glow to every day ... she must be
made to see the real face of the circumstance and
then to know and to feel that she was not forlorn;
that the glow was there ... first to brush away
the delusion ruthlessly ... and then let the glow
come back, begin to come back, from another
source.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-7">
7
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Left alone with silence all along the street,
Christine inaudible in the kitchen, dead silence
in the house, Miriam gathered up her blouse and
ran upstairs. As she passed through the changing
lights of the passage, up the little dark staircase
past the turn that led to the little lavatory and the
little bathroom and was bright in the light of a
small uncurtained lattice, on up the four stairs
<a class="pagenum" title="36" id="page-36"/>
that brought her to the landing where the opposing
bedroom doors flooded their light along the
strip of green carpet between the polished balustrade
and the high polished glass-doored bookcase,
scenes from the future, moving in boundless backgrounds
came streaming unsummoned into her
mind, making her surroundings suddenly unfamiliar
... the past would come again....
Inside her room—tidied until nothing was visible
but the permanent shining gleaming furniture and
ornaments; only the large box of matches on the
corner of the mantlepiece betraying the movement
of separate days, telling her of nights of
arrival, the lighting of the gas, the sudden light in
the frosted globe preluding freedom and rest,
bringing the beginning of rest with the gleam of
the fresh quiet room—she found the nearer past,
her years of London work set in the air, framed and
contemplable like the pictures on the wall, and
beside them the early golden years in snatches,
chosen pictures from here and there, communicated,
and stored in the loyal memory of the
Brooms. Leaping in among these live days came
to-day ... the blouse belonged to the year that
was waiting far off, invisible behind the high wall
of Christmas. She dropped it on the bed and ran
<a class="pagenum" title="37" id="page-37"/>
downstairs to the little drawing-room. The fire
had not yet conquered the mustiness of the air.
The room was full of strange dim lights coming in
through the stained glass door of the little greenhouse.
She pushed open the glass door turning
the light to a soft green and sat sociably down in a
low chair her hands clasped upon her knees, topics
racing through her mind in a voice thrilling with
stored up laughter. In her ears was the rush of
spring rain on the garden foliage, and presently
a voice saying where are we going this summer?...
By the time they came back she would be
too happy to speak. Better perhaps to go out
into the maze of little streets and in wearying
of them be glad to come back. As she moved to
the door she saw the garden in late summer fulness,
the holidays over, their heights gleaming
through long talks on the seat at the end of the
garden, the answering glow of the great blossoms
of purple clematis hiding the north London
masonry of the little conservatory, the great
spaces of autumn opening out and out running
down rich with happenings to where the high
wall of Christmas again rose and shut out the
future. She ran busily upstairs casting away
sight and hearing and hurried thoughtlessly into
<a class="pagenum" title="38" id="page-38"/>
her outdoor things and out into the street. She
wandered along the little roads turning and turning
until she came to a broad open thoroughfare
lined with high grey houses standing back behind
colourless railed-in gardens. Trams jingled up
and down the centre of the road bearing the
names of unfamiliar parts of London. People
were standing about on the terminal islands and
getting in and out of the trams. She had come
too far. Here was the wilderness, the undissembling
soul of north London, its harsh unvarying
all-embracing oblivion.... Innumerable
impressions gathered on walks with the schoolgirls
or in lonely wanderings; the unveiled motives
and feelings of people she had passed in the streets,
the expression of noses and shoulders, the indefinable
uniformity, of bearing and purpose and
vision, crowded in on her, oppressing and darkening
the crisp light air. She fought against them,
rallying to the sense of the day. It was Christmas
Day for them all. They were keeping Christmas
in their homes, carrying it out into the streets,
going about with parcels, greeting each other in
their harsh ironic voices. Long ago she had
passed out of their world for ever, carrying it
forward, a wound in her consciousness unhealed,
<a class="pagenum" title="39" id="page-39"/>
but powerless to re-inflict itself, powerless to
spread into her life. They and their world were
still there, unchanged. But they could never
touch her again, ensconced in her wealth. It did
not matter now that they went their way just in
the way they went their way. To hate them for
past suffering now that they were banished and
powerless was to allow them to spoil her day....
They were even a possession, a curious thing apart,
unknown to anyone in her London life ... <em>dear</em>
north Londoners. She paused a moment, looking
boldly across at the figures moving on the islands.
After all they did not know that it was cold and
desolate and harsh and dreadful to be going about
on Christmas Day in a place that looked as this
place looked, in trams. They did not know what
was wrong with their clothes and their bearing
and their way of looking at things. That was what
was so terrible though. What could teach them?
There were so many. They lived and died in
amongst each other. What could change them?...
Her face felt drawn and weariness was
coming upon her limbs ... a group was approaching
her along the wide pavement, laughing and
talking, a blatter of animated voices; she turned
briskly for the relief of meeting and passing close
<a class="pagenum" title="40" id="page-40"/>
to them ... too near, too near ... prosperity
and kindliness, prosperous fresh laughing faces,
easily bought clothes, the manner of the large
noisy house and large secure income, free movement
in an accessible world, all turned to dangerous
weapons in wrong hands by the unfinished,
insensitive mouths, the ugly slur in the speech,
the shapelessness of bearing, the naïvely visible
thoughts, circumscribed by business, the illustrated
monthly magazines, the summer month at
the seaside; their lives were exactly like their way
of walking down the street, a confident blind
trampling. Speech was not needed to reveal their
certainties; they shed certainty from every angle
of their unfinished persons. Certainty about
everything. Incredulous contempt for all uncertainty.
Impatient contempt for all who could
not stand up for themselves. Cheerful uncritical
affection for each other. And for all who were
living or trying to live just as they did ... The
little bushes of variegated laurel grouped in
railed-off oblongs along the gravelled pathway
between the two wide strips of pavement, drew
her gaze. They shone crisply, their yellow and
green enamel washed clean by yesterday’s rain.
She hurried along feeling out towards them
<a class="pagenum" title="41" id="page-41"/>
through downcast eyes. They glinted back at
her unsunned by the sunlight, rootless sapless
surfaces set in repellent clay, spread out in meaningless
air. To and fro her eyes slid upon the
varnished leaves ... she saw them in a park set in
amongst massed dark evergreens, gleaming out
through afternoon mist, keeping the last of the
light as the people drifted away leaving the slopes
and vistas clear ... grey avenues and dewy slopes
drifted before her in the faint light of dawn, the
grey growing pale and paler; the dew turned to
a scatter of jewels and the sky soared up high
above the growing shimmer of sunlit green and
gold. Isolated morning figures hurried across the
park, aware of its morning freshness, seeing it as
their own secret garden, part of their secret
day....
</p>
<p>
From the sunlit white facade of a large London
house the laurels looked down through a white
stone-pillared balustrade. They appeared coming
suddenly with the light of a street lamp, clumped
safely behind the railings of a Bloomsbury square ...
the opening of a side street led her back into
the maze of little roads. The protective presence
of the little house was there and she sauntered
happily along through channels of sheltered sunlit
<a class="pagenum" title="42" id="page-42"/>
silence.... What was she doing here? At Christmas-time
one should be where one belonged.
Gathering and searching about her came the
claims of the firesides that had lain open to her
choice, drawing her back into the old life, the
only life known to those who sat round them.
They looked out from that life, seeing hers as
hardship and gloom, pitying her, turning blind
eyes unwillingly towards her attempts to unveil
and make it known to them. She saw herself
relinquishing efforts, putting on a desperate
animation, professing interests and opinions and
talking as people talk, while they watched her with
eyes that saw nothing but a pitiful attempt to
hide an awful fate, lonely poverty, the absence of
any opening prospect, nothing ahead but a gloom
deepening as the years counted themselves off.
Those were the facts—as almost anyone might
see them. They made those facts live; they
tugged at the jungle of feelings that had the
power to lead one back through any small crushing
maiming aperture.... In their midst lived the
past and the thing that had ended it and plunged
it into a darkness that still held the threat of
destroying reason and life. Perhaps only thus
could it be faced. Perhaps only in that way.
<a class="pagenum" title="43" id="page-43"/>
What other way was there? Forgetfulness blotted
it out and let one live on. But it was always there,
impossible, when one looked back.... The little
house brought forgetfulness and rest. It made
no break in the new life. The new life flowed
through it, sunlit. It was a flight down strange
vistas, a superfluity of wild strangeness, with a
clue in one’s hand, the door of retreat always
open; rest and forgetfulness piling up within
one into strength.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-1-8">
8
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
The incidents Grace had described went in
little disconnected scenes in and out of the caverns
of the dying fire. She was waiting tremulously
for a verdict. They seemed to Miriam so decisive
that she found it difficult to keep within Grace’s
point of view. She stood in the picturesque
suburb, saw the distant glimpse of Highgate
Woods, the pretty corner house standing alone
in its garden, the sisters in the dresses they had
worn at the dance talking to their mother indoors,
waited on by their polite admiring brother; their
unconsciousness, their lives as they looked to themselves.
Everything fitted in with the leghorn hats
they had worn at the league garden party in the
<a class="pagenum" title="44" id="page-44"/>
summer. She could have warned Grace then if she
had heard about the hats.... Grace had not yet
found out that people were arranged in groups....
The only honest thing to say now would be—oh
well of course with a mother and sisters like
<em>that</em>; don’t you <em>see</em>—what they are? Her 
mind
drew a little circle round the family group. It
spun round them on and on as they went through
life. She frowned her certainty into the fire,
ranging herself with the unknown people she knew
so well. If she did not speak Grace would see in
her something of the quality that was the passport
into that smooth-voiced world ... she
imagined herself further and further into it, seeing
everyday incidents, hearing conversations slide
from the surfaces of minds that in all their
differences made one even surface, unconscious
unbroken and maddeningly unquestioning and
unaware.... They were unaware of anything,
though they had easy fluent words about everything ...
underneath the surface that kept Grace
off they were ... amœbæ, awful determined
unconscious ... octopi ... frightful things
with one eye, tentacles, poison-sacs ... the surface
made them, not they the surface; rules ...
they were civilisation. But they knew the rules;
<a class="pagenum" title="45" id="page-45"/>
they knew how to do the surface ... they held
to them and lived by them. It was a sort of game....
They were martyrs; with empty lives ...
always awake, day and night, with unrelaxed wills
... she turned and met frank eyes still waiting for
a verdict. All the strength of Grace’s personality
was quivering there; all the determined faith
in reason and principle. Perhaps if she had a
clear field she could disarm them ... anyone,
everyone. If she could get near enough they
would find out her reality and her strength. But
they would not want to be like her. They would
run in the end from their apprehension of her,
back to the things she did not see.... They had
done so. He had; it was clear. Or she could not
have spoken of him. If you can speak of a thing,
it is past ... Speaking makes it glow with a
life that is not its own.—There’s a lot more to
tell you—said Grace pressing her hand. Miriam
turned from the fire; Grace was looking as she
had done when she began her story. Miriam sat
back in her chair searching her face and form
trying to find and express the secret of her indomitable
conviction. Being what she was, why
could she not be sufficient to herself? Entrenched
in uncertainty she seemed less than herself. Her
<a class="pagenum" title="46" id="page-46"/>
careful good clothes, so exquisitely kept, the
delicate old gold chain, the little pearled cross,
the old fine delicate rings, the centuries of
shadowy ecclesiasticism in her head and face, the
look of waiting, gazing from grey stone framed
days upon a jewelled splendour, grew with her
uncertainty small and limited. It was unbearable
that they should have no meaning ... Grace
was ready to take all she possessed into a world
where it would have no meaning; ready to disappear
and be changed. She was changed already.
She could not get back and there was nothing to
go forward to. Miriam dropped her eyes and
sat back in her chair. The tide of her own life
flowed fresh all about her; the room and the
figure at her side made a sharply separated scene,
a play watched from a distance, the end visible
in the beginning to be read in the shapes and
tones and folds of the setting, the intentions and
statements nothing but impotent irrelevance,
only bearable for the opportunities they offered
here and there, involuntarily, for sudden escape
into the reality that nothing touched or changed.
If only Grace could be forced to see the unchanging
reality.... Oh Miriam darling, breathed
Grace in an even, anxious tone. Miriam suppressed
<a class="pagenum" title="47" id="page-47"/>
a desire to whistle;—Oh well of course
that may make a <em>difference</em> she said hurriedly,
checking the thrill in her voice. Far back in the
caverns of the fire life moved sunlit. She dropped
her eyes and drew away the hand that Grace had
clasped. Life danced and sang within her; shreds
of song; the sense of the singing of the wind;
clear bright light streaming through large houses,
quickening on walls and stairways and across wide
rooms. Along clear avenues of light radiating
from the future, pouring from behind her into the
inner channels of her eyes and ears came unknown
forms moving in a brilliance, casting a brilliance
across the visible past, warming its shadows,
bathing its bright levels in sparkling gold. Her
free hands lifted themselves until only the tips
of her fingers rested on her knees and her hair
strove from its roots as if the whole length would
stand and wave upright.—You see—she said to
gain a moment. Suddenly her mind became a
blank. Her body was heavy on her chair, ill-clothed,
too warm, peevishly tingling with
desires. She stirred, shrinking from her ugly,
inexorable cheap clothes, her glasses, the mystery
of her rigid stupidly done hair; how how <em>how</em>
did people get expression into their hair consciously
<a class="pagenum" title="48" id="page-48"/>
and not by accident? Why did Grace like
her in spite of all these things, in spite of the evil
thoughts which must show. She did. She had
felt nothing, seen nothing. She dissembled her
face and turned towards Grace, gazing past her
into the darkness beyond the range of the firelight.
Just outside the rim of her glasses Grace’s firelit
face gleamed on the edge of the darkness half
turned towards her. Leaping into her mind came
the realisation that she was sitting there talking
to someone ... <em>Marvellous</em> to speak and hear
a voice answer. Astounding; more marvellous
and astounding than anything they could discuss.
Grace must know this, even if she were unconscious
of it ... some little sound they could
both hear, a little mark upon the stillness, scattering
light and relief. She turned her eyes and met
Grace’s, velvety, deeply sparkling, shedding admiration
and tyrannous love, patiently waiting—Well,—said
Miriam, sleepily feeling for a thread
of connected thought.—D’you mean a difference
about my taking aunt to call, asked Grace with
fear in her eyes.—No, my dear, said Miriam
impatiently.—Can’t you see you can’t do that
anyhow?——They’ve only been there five
years, said Grace in a low determined recitative—We’ve
<a class="pagenum" title="49" id="page-49"/>
lived in what’s almost the same neighbourhood,
fifteen. So it’s our place to call first—Miriam
sighed harshly.—That doesn’t make a
<em>scrap</em> of difference she retorted flushing with
anger.—I wish I had your grasp of things Miriam
dear, said Grace with gentle weariness.—Well—we’ve
got to-morrow and Monday said Miriam
getting up with an appearance of briskness and
striking random notes on the piano. Grace
laughed.—I suppose we ought to light the gas
she said getting up?—Why?——Oh well—Florrie
will be coming in and asking why we’re
sitting in the dark——What if she does?——Oh,
I think I’ll light it Miriam. Miriam
sat down again and stared into the fire. After
supper they would all sit, harshly visible, round
the hot fire, enduring the stifling unneeded
gaslight.
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-2">
<a class="pagenum" title="50" id="page-50"/>
CHAPTER II
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-2-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> rolled up the last pair of mended
stockings....
</p>
<p>
She looked at her watch again. It was too late
now even to go round to Kennett Street. She
had spent New Year’s Eve alone in a cold bedroom.
Why could one not be sure whether it
was right or wrong? It was only by sitting hour
after hour letting one’s fingers sew that the evening
had come to an end. It could not be wrong
to make up one’s mind to begin the new year
with a long night’s rest in a tidy room with everything
mended. But the feeling that the old year
ought to be seen out with people had pricked all
the time like conscience. It only stopped pricking
now because it was too late. And there was
a sadness left in the evening.... She lifted her
coat from her knees and stood up. The room
shone. In her throat and nostrils was the smell
of dust coming from the floor and carpet and
draperies. But the bright light of the gas and
<a class="pagenum" title="51" id="page-51"/>
the soft light of the reading-lamp shone upon
perfect order. Everything was mended and would
presently be put away in tidy drawers. She was
rested and strong, undisturbed by changes that
would have come from social hours. No one had
missed her. Many people scattered about in
houses had thought of her. If they had, she had
been there with them. She could not be everywhere,
with all of them. That was certain.
There was nothing to decide about that....
The Brooms had missed her ... they would
have enjoyed their New Year’s Eve better if she
had been there. It would have been jolly to
have gone again so soon, after the short half week,
and sat down by the fire where Christmas lingered
and waited for the coming of the year with
them. It would have been a loyalty to something.
But it was too soon to be sitting about
between comfortable meals talking, explaining
things, making life stop, while reality went on
far away.... One still felt rested from Christmas
and wanting to begin doing things....
Perhaps it was not altogether through undecided
waiting that the evening had come and gone by
here in this room. Perhaps it was some kind of
decision that could not be seen or expressed. Now
<a class="pagenum" title="52" id="page-52"/>
that in solitude it had come to an end there was
realisation. Quiet realisation of new year’s eve;
just quiet realisation of new year’s eve. One
would pass on into the new year in an unbroken
peace with the resolutions for the new life distinct
in one’s mind. She found an exercise book and
wrote them down. There they stood, pitting the
calm steady innermost part of her against all her
other selves. Free desperate obedience to them
would bring a revelation. No matter how the
other selves felt as she kept them, if she kept them
every moment of her life would go out from an
inward calm.... The room was full of clear
strength. There must always be a clear cold
room to return to. There was no other way of
keeping the inward peace. Outside one need do
nothing but what was expected of one, asking
nothing for oneself but freedom to return, to the
centre. Life would be an endless inward singing
until the end came. But not too much inward
singing, spending one’s strength in song; the
song must be kept down and low so that it would
last all the time and never fail. Then a song
would answer back from outside, in everything.
She stepped lightly and powerfully about the
room putting away her mended things.... One
<a class="pagenum" title="53" id="page-53"/>
would move like the wind always, a steady human
south-west wind, alive, without personality or
speech. No more books. Books all led to the
same thing. They were like talking about things.
All the things in books were unfulfilled duty. No
more interest in men. They shut off the inside
world. Women who had anything whatever to
do with men were not themselves. They were in
a noisy confusion, playing a part all the time....
The only real misery in being alone was the fear of
being left out of things. It was a wrong fear. It
pushed you into things and then everything
disappeared.... Not to listen outside, where
there was nothing to hear. In the end you came
away empty with time gone and lost.... To
remember, whatever happened, not to be afraid
of being alone.
</p>
<p>
She stood staring at the sheeny gaslit brown-yellow
varnish of the wall-paper above the mantelpiece.
There was no thought in the silence, no
past or future, nothing but the strange thing for
which there were no words, something that was
always there as if by appointment, waiting for
one to get through to it away from everything
in life. It was the thing that was nothing. Yet
it seemed the only thing that came near and meant
<a class="pagenum" title="54" id="page-54"/>
anything at all. It was happiness and realisation.
It was being suspended, in nothing. It came out
of oneself because it came only when one had been
a long time alone. It was not oneself. It could
not be God. It did not mind what you were or
what you had done. It would be there if you had
just murdered someone ... it was only there
when you had murdered everybody and everything
and torn yourself away. Perhaps it was
evil. One’s own evil genius. But how could it
make you so blissful? What was one—what had
one done to bring the feeling of goodness and
beauty and truth into the patch on the wall and
presently make all the look of the distant world
and everything in experience sound like music in
a dream? She dropped her eyes. From the
papered wall radiance still seemed to flow over
her as she stood, defining her brow and hair,
shedding a warmth in the cold room. Looking
again she found the wall less bright; but within
the radius of her motionless eyes everything in
the brightly lit corner glowed happily; not
drawing her but standing complete and serene,
like someone standing at a little distance, expressing
agreement.... Just in front of her a
single neat warning tap sounded in the air,
<a class="pagenum" title="55" id="page-55"/>
touching the quick of her mind.... St.
Pancras clock—striking down the chimney....
She ran across to the dark lattice and flung it open.
In the air hung the echo of the first deep boom
from Westminster. St. Pancras and the nearer
clocks were telling themselves off against it. They
would have finished long before Big Ben came to
an end. Which was midnight? Let it be St.
Pancras. She counted swiftly backwards; four
strokes.... Out in the darkness the dark world
was turning away from darkness. Within the
spaces of the night the surface of a daylit landscape
gleamed for an instant tilted lengthways
across the sky.... Little sounds came snapping
faintly up through the darkness from the
street below, voices and the creaking open of
doors. Windows were being pushed open up and
down the street. The new year changed to a soft
moonlit breath stealing through the darkness,
brimming over the faces at the doors and windows,
touching their brows with fingers of dawn,
sending fresh soothing healing fingers in amongst
their hair.... Eleven ... twelve....
Across the rushing scale of St. Pancras bells came
a fearful clangour. Bicycle bells, cab whistles,
dinner bells the banging of tea-trays and gongs....
<a class="pagenum" title="56" id="page-56"/>
Of course ... New Year ... it
must be a Bloomsbury custom. She had had her
share in a Bloomsbury New Year. Rather jolly
... rowdy; but jolly in that sort of way....
She could hear the Baileys laughing and talking on
their doorstep. A smooth firm foreign voice
flung out a shapely little fragment of song.
Miriam watched its outline. It repeated itself
in her mind with the foreign voice and personality
of the singer. She drew back into her room.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-2-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Her resolutions kept her at work on Saturday
afternoon. A steady morning’s work disposed of
the correspondence and the inrush of paid
accounts. After lunch she worked in the surgeries
until they were ready for Monday morning and
made an attack on the mass of clerical work that
remained from the old year. She sat working
until she grew so cold that she knew if she stayed
on in the cold window space she would have the
beginning of a cold. Better to go, and have late
evenings every day next week, cheered by the
protests of the Orlys and ending with warm hours
in the den. As she got up and felt the aching of
<a class="pagenum" title="57" id="page-57"/>
her throat and the harsh hot chill running through
her nerves she realised that anyhow she was in for
a cold. There was no room to go to to get warm
before going out. There seemed to be no warmth
anywhere in the world. Torpid and stupid,
miserably realising the increasing glow of her
nose and the numb clumsiness of her feet she
put away the ledgers and got into her outdoor
things. She resented the sight of the bound
volume of The Dental Cosmos that she had put
aside to take home. Her interest in it was useless;
as useless as everything else in the freezing
world. Sounds of dancing and chanting came up
the basement stairs. When their work was done
they could laugh and sing in a warm room.
</p>
<p>
Turning northwards toward the Marylebone
Road she met a bleak wind and turned back and
down Devonshire Street and eastwards towards
St. Pancras through a maze of side streets. The
icy wind drove against her all the way. When she
crossed a wide thoroughfare it was reinforced
from the north. Eddies of colourless dust
swirled about the pavements. At every crossing
in the many little streets there was some big
vehicle just upon her keeping her shrinking in
the cold while it rumbled over the cobbles, overwhelming
<a class="pagenum" title="58" id="page-58"/>
her with a harsh grating roar that
filled the streets and the sky. Darkness was beginning;
a hard black January darkness, utterly
different to the friendly exciting twilights of the
old year standing far far away with summer just
behind them and Christmas ahead....
</p>
<p>
Inside the house a cold grey twilight was
blotting out the warm brownness. A door opened
as she turned the stairhead on the second floor
and a tall thin pale-faced young man in dark
clothes and a light waistcoat flashed past her and
leaped lightly downstairs. Miriam carried her
impression up to her room, going hurriedly and
stumbling on the stairs as she went.... Something
hard, metallic, like a wire spring, cold and
relentless. Belonging to a cold dreadful darkness
and not knowing it; <em>confident</em>. He had whistled
going downstairs, or sung. <em>Had</em> he? Perhaps he
was the foreigner who had sung last night?
Perfectly and awfully dreadful.... The whole
house and even her own room had been changed
in a twinkling. Coming in it had had a warmth,
even in the cold twilight. Now it lay open and
bleak, all its rooms naked and visible, a house
“foreign young gentlemen” heard of and came
to live in. He was one of the “Norwegian young
<a class="pagenum" title="59" id="page-59"/>
gentlemen” who had lived in Mrs. Reynolds’
boarding house in Woburn Place and this was
just another boarding house to him. Perhaps the
house was full of boarders.... She had grown
accustomed to the Baileys having come up from
the basement to the ground floor and had got into
the habit of coming briskly through the hall with
a preoccupied manner, ignoring the invariable
appearance of a peeping form at the partly opened
door of the dining-room. It was strange now to
reflect that the house had always been full of
lodgers. What sort of people had they been?
She could not remember ever having met a
lodger face to face, or heard any sounds in the
many downstairs rooms.... Perhaps it had been
partly through going out so early and coming
back only when the A.B.C. closed and being out
or away so much at week-ends ... but also
she must have been oblivious.... The house
had been her own; waiting for her when she
found it; the quiet road of large high grey
mysterious houses, the two rows of calm balconied
facades, the green squares at either end, the green
door she waited for as she turned unseeing into
the road from the quiet thoroughfare of Endsleigh
Gardens, her triumphant faithful latchkey, the
<a class="pagenum" title="60" id="page-60"/>
sheltered dimness of the hall, the great staircase,
the many large closed doors, the lonely obscurity
of her empty top floor. What had come now was
the fulfilment of the apprehension she had had
when Mrs. Bailey had spoken the word boarders.
Here they were. They would come and go and go
up and downstairs from their bedrooms to that
dining-room where the disturbing disclosure had
been made and the unknown drawing-room....
Perhaps it would be a failure. She could not
imagine Mrs. Bailey and the two vague furtive
children in skimpy blue serge dresses dealing with
the young Norwegian gentleman. He would not
stay.... If boarders failed Mrs. Bailey might
give up the house altogether.... She found
herself sitting in her outdoor things with the
large volume heavy on her knees in the middle of
the room. She felt too languid and miserable to
get up and take the small chair and the large book
to the table and began wretchedly turning the
pages with her gloved hands. Here it was. She
glanced through the long article, reading passages
here and there. There seemed to be nothing
more; she had gathered the gist of it all in
glancing through it at Wimpole Street. There
was no need to have brought <a id="corr-6"/>it home. It was
<a class="pagenum" title="61" id="page-61"/>
quite clear that she belonged to the lymphatico-nervous
class. It was the worst of the four classes
of humanity. But all the symptoms were hers....
She read once more the account of the nervo-bilious
type. It was impossible to fit into that.
Those people were dark and sanguine and energetic.
It was very strange. Having bilious
attacks and not having the advantages of the
bilious temperament. It meant having the worst
of everything. No energy no initiative no hopefulness
no resisting power; and sometimes bilious
attacks. She was useless; an encumbrance;
left out of life forever, because it was better for
life to leave her out.... She sat staring at the
shabby panels of her wardrobe, hating them for
their quiet merciless agreement with her thoughts.
To stop now and come to an end would be a relief.
But there was nothing anywhere that would come
in and end her. Why did life produce people
with lymphatico-nervous temperaments? Perhaps
it was the explanation of all she had suffered
in the past; of the things that had driven her
again and again to go away and away, anywhere.
She wrenched herself away from her thoughts and
flung forward to the sense of sunshine, sudden
beautiful things, unreasonable secret happiness,
<a class="pagenum" title="62" id="page-62"/>
waiting somewhere beyond the blackness, to come
again. But it would be mean to take them. She
brought nothing to anybody. She had no right
to anything. She ought to be branded and go
about in a cloak.... There was no one in the
world who would care if she never appeared anywhere
again. She sat shrinking before this
thought. It was the plain and simple truth.
Nothing that any kind and cheerful person might
say could alter it. It would only make it worse.
She wondered that she had never put it to herself
before. It must always have been there since her
mother’s death. There were one or two people
who thought they cared. But they only cared
because they did not know. It they saw more of
her they would cease even to think they cared;
and they had their own lives.... She had gone
on being happy exactly in the same way as she
had forgotten there were people in the house; just
going lymphatico-nervously about with her eyes
shut. But any alternative was worse. Insincere.
If one could not die one must go dragging on,
keeping oneself to oneself. That was why it was
a relief to be in London; surrounded by people
who did not know what one was really like.
Social life, any sort of social life anywhere would
<a class="pagenum" title="63" id="page-63"/>
not help. It only made it worse. Being like this
was not a morbid state due to the lack of cheerful
society. People who said that were wrong. The
sign that they were wrong was the way they went
about being deliberately cheerful and sociable.
That was worse than anything; the refusal to
face the truth. But at least they could endure
people.... If one could not endure anyone one
ought to be dead ... to sit staring in front of
one until one was dead ... the wardrobe did
not disagree. She averted her eyes as from an
observer. They fell upon her hopeless person
dressed in the clothes in which she moved about
in the world. She was bitterly cold. But she
sat on unable to summon courage to turn and
face her room. Her eyes wandered vacantly back
to the panels and down to the drawer below them
and back again. The warm quiet booming of a
gong came up through the house. She got to her
feet and stood listening in amazement. Mrs.
Bailey had instituted a boarding-house gong!
She went out on to the landing; the gong ceased
and rattled gently against its framework released
from hands that had stilled its reverberation. A
voice sounded in the hall and then the dining-room
door closed and there was silence. They
<a class="pagenum" title="64" id="page-64"/>
were having tea. Of course; every day; life
going on down there in the dining-room. Involuntarily
her feet were on the stairs. She went
down the narrow flight holding to the balustrade
to steady the stumbling of her benumbed limbs.
<em>What</em> was she doing? Going down to Mrs.
Bailey; going to stand for a moment close by
Mrs. Bailey’s tea-tray. No; impossible to let the
Baileys save her; having done nothing for herself.
Impossible to be beholden to the <em>Baileys</em>
for anything. Restoration by them would be
restoration to shame. She had moved unconsciously.
Her life was still her own. She was in
the world, in a house, going down some stairs.
For the present the pretence of living could go on.
She could not go back to her room; nor forward
to any other room. She pushed blindly on, bitter
anger growing within her. She <em>had</em> moved towards
the Baileys. It was irrevocable. She had
departed from all her precedents. She would
always know it. Wherever she found herself it
would always be there, at the root of her consciousness,
shaming her, showing in everything
she did or said. Half-way downstairs she restrained
her heavy movements and began to go
swiftly and stealthily. Mean, mean mean;
<a class="pagenum" title="65" id="page-65"/>
utterly mean and damned, a sneaking evil spirit.
She pulled herself upright and cleared her throat
in a business-like way. The echo of Harriett’s
voice in her voice plumbed her for tears. But
there were no tears. Only something close round
her that moulded her face in lines of despair. The
hall was in sight. She was going down to the hall
to look for letters on the hall table, and go back.
She paused in the hall. If the dining-room door
opened she would kill someone with a cold blind
glance and go angrily on and out of the front
door. If it did not open? It remained closed.
It was not going to open. It came quietly wide
as if someone had been waiting behind it with the
handle turned. Mrs. Bailey was in the hall with
a firm little hand on her arm.—<em>Well</em>, young
lady?—Miriam turned full round, shrinking
backwards towards the hall table. Mrs. Bailey
was clutching her hands—Won’t you come in
and have a cup of tea?——I can’t whispered
Miriam briskly, moving towards the dining-room
door.—I’ve got to go out she murmured, standing
just inside the open door.—Going out asked
Mrs. Bailey in a refined little voice throwing a
proud fond shy glance towards Miriam from her
recovered place behind the tea-tray. Her cheeks
<a class="pagenum" title="66" id="page-66"/>
were flushed and her eyes sparkled brightly under
the gaslight. Miriam’s glance elastic in the warmth
coming from the room swept from the flood of
yellow hair on the back of the youngest Bailey
girl sitting close at her mother’s left hand,
across to the far side of the table. The pale grey-blue
eyes of the eldest Bailey girl were directed
towards the bread and butter her hand was
stretched out to take with the unseeing look they
must have had when she had turned her face
towards the door. At her side, between her and
her mother sat the young Norwegian gentleman, a
dark blue upright form with a narrow gold bar
set aslant in the soft mass of black silk tie bulging
about the uncreased flatness of his length of grey
waistcoat. He had reared his head smoothly
upright and a smooth metallic glance had slid
across her from large dark clear easily opened
eyes. He was very young, about twenty; the
leanness of his dart-like perfectly clad form led
slenderly up to a lean distinguished head. But
above the wide high pale brow where the bone
stared squarely through the skin and was beaten
in at the temples the skull had a snakelike flatness
the polished hair was poor and worn.—Yes,
murmured Miriam abstractedly, I’m just going
<a class="pagenum" title="67" id="page-67"/>
out——Don’t catch cold young lady, smiled
Mrs. Bailey.—Oh well, I’ll try not to, said
Miriam departing. They’ll never do it, she told
herself as she made her way through the darkness
towards her A.B.C. He’ll find out. He thinks
he is learning English in an English family.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-2-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Mrs. Bailey came up <em>herself</em> to do Miriam’s
room on Sunday morning. Miriam wondered as
she came archly in after a brisk tap on the door
how she knew that her visit caused dismay. The
visit of the little maid did not break into anything.
It only meant standing for a minute or so by the
window longing for the snuffling and shuffling
to be over. But if Mrs. Bailey were coming up
every Sunday morning.... She stood at Mrs.
Bailey’s disposal sheepishly smiling, in the middle
of the room.—You didn’t expect to see <em>me</em>,
young lady—Miriam broadened her smile.—I
want to talk to you—They stood confronted in
the room just as they had done the first time Mrs.
Bailey had been there with her and they had
settled about the rent. Only that then the room
had seemed large and real and at once inhabited,
<a class="pagenum" title="68" id="page-68"/>
the crown of the large house and the reality of
all the unknown rooms. Now it seemed to be at a
disadvantage, one of Mrs. Bailey’s unconsidered
attics, apart from the life that was beginning to
flow all round her downstairs. Something in
Mrs. Bailey’s face when she said I was wondering
if you would give Sissie a few French lessons
spoke the energy of the new feeling and thought.
Miriam was astounded. She called up a vision of
Sissie’s pale steady grey-blue eyes, her characterless
hair, her thickset swiftly ambling little figure. She
was the kind of girl who after good schooling could
spend a year in France and come back unable to
speak French. But if Mrs. Bailey wished it she
would have to learn from somebody.... So
she conspired with an easy contemptuous conscience
and they stood murmuring over the plan,
Mrs. Bailey producing one by one, fearfully, in a
low motherly encouraging tone the things she
had arranged beforehand in her own mind.
Before she went she bustled to the window and
tweaked the ends of the little Madras muslin
curtains. Why don’t you go down to the drawn-room
for a while—she asked tweaking and flicking.—You’ll
have it all to yourself. Mr. Elsing’s
gone out. I should go down if I was you and get
<a class="pagenum" title="69" id="page-69"/>
a warm up.—Miriam thanked her and promised
to go and wondered whether the Norwegian’s
name was Helsing or Elsen. When Mrs. Bailey
had gone she walked busily about her affronted
room. It must be Helsing. A man named Elsen
would be shorter and stouter and kindly. Of
course she would not go down to the drawing-room.
She ransacked her Saratoga trunk and
found a Havet and a phrase book. She would
teach Sissie the rules of French pronunciation and
two or three phrases every day and make some
sort of beginning of syntax with Havet. There
would be no difficulty in filling up the quarter of
an hour. But it would be teaching in the bad
cruel old-fashioned way. To begin at once with
Piccola or Le Roi des Montagnes and talk to her
in the character of a Frenchman wanting to become
a boarder would be the best.... But
Sissie would not grasp that slow way. It would be
too long before she began to see that she was
learning anything ... But the smattering of
phrases and rules from a book handed out without
any trouble to herself on her way to her room and
before she wanted to go out was too little to give
in exchange for a proper breakfast ready for her
in a warm room every day and the option of
<a class="pagenum" title="70" id="page-70"/>
having single meals at any time for a very small
sum ... because the Baileys were trying
to turn themselves into an English family prepared
to receive foreigners who wanted to learn
English she had promised the lessons as if she
thought the plan good....
</p>
<p>
She crept downstairs through the silent empty
house, pausing at the open drawing-room door to
listen to the faint far-away subterranean sounds
coming from the kitchen. All the furniture
seemed to be waiting for someone or something.
That was a console table. She must have noticed
the jar on it as she came into the room, or somewhere
else, it looked so familiar. One ought to
know the name of the material it was made of.
It was like a coarse veined agate. In the narrow
strip of mirror that ran from the table high up
the wall between the two french windows stood
the heavy self-conscious reflection of the elegant
jug. It was elegant and complete; the heavy
minutely moulded flowers and leaves festooned
about its tapering curves did not destroy its
elegance. It stood out alone and complete
against the reflected strip of shabby room.
Extraordinary. Where had it come from? It
was an imitation of something. A reflection of
<a class="pagenum" title="71" id="page-71"/>
some other life. Had it ever been seen by anybody
who knew the kind of life it was meant to be
surrounded by? She backed into an obstacle and
turned with her hand upon the low velvet back
of a little circular chair. Its narrow circular strip
of back was supported by little wooden pillars.
She took possession of it. The coiled spring of
the seat showed its humpy outline through the
velvet and gave way crookedly under her when
she sat down. But she felt she was in her place in
the room; out amongst its strange spaces. In
front of her about the fireside were two large
armchairs upholstered in shabby Utrecht velvet
and a wicker chair with a woolwork cushion on its
seat and a dingy antimacassar worked in crewels
thrown over its high back. To her right stood
a small battered three-tiered lacquer and bamboo
tea-table, and beyond it a large circular table
polished and inlaid and strewn with dingy books
occupied the end of the room between the fireplace
and the wall. On the other side of the fireplace
stood a chiffonier in black wood supporting
and reflecting in its little mirror a large square
deeply carved dusty brown wooden box inlaid
with mother-of-pearl. Crowding against the
chiffonier was a large shabby bamboo tea-table and
<a class="pagenum" title="72" id="page-72"/>
a scatter of velvet-seated drawing-room chairs
with carved dusty abruptly curving backs and
legs. Away to the left rose one of the high french
windows. The dingy cream lace curtains almost
meeting across it, went up and up from the dusty
floor and ended high up, under a red woollen
valence hanging from a heavy gilt cornice.
Between the curtains she could catch a glimpse of
the balcony railings and strips between them of
the brown brickwork of the opposite house. She
stared at the vague scatter of vases and bowls and
small ornaments standing in front of the large
overmantel and dimly reflected in its dusty
mirror. Two tall vases on the mantelshelf holding
dried grasses carried her eyes up to two short vases
holding dried grasses standing on the wooden-pillared
brackets of the overmantel, and back
again to themselves. She rose and turned away to
shake off their influence and turned back again at
once to see what had attracted her attention.
Satsuma; at either end of the mantelpiece shutting
in the scatter of vases and bowls two large
squat rounded Satsuma basins—with arched lids.
On the centre of each lid was a little gilded knob.
Extraordinary. Unlike any Satsuma she had ever
seen. Where had they come from? She wandered
<a class="pagenum" title="73" id="page-73"/>
about the room, eagerly taking in battered chairs
and more little tables and whatnots and faded
pictures on the faded walls. What was it that had
risen in her mind as she came into the room? She
recalled the moment of coming in. The <em>piano</em>
... the quiet shock of it standing there with
the shut-in waiting look of a piano, confronting
the large stillness of the room.... Turning to
face it she passed into the world of drawing-room
pianos; the rosewood case, the faded rose silk
pleating strained taut, its margin hidden under a
rosewood trellis; the little tarnished sconces, for
shaded candles, the small leather-topped easily
twirling stool with its single thick deeply carved
leg, a lady sitting, tinkling and flourishing delicately
through airs with variations; an English
piano, perfectly wrought and finished, music
swathed and hidden in elegance ... “a little
music” ... but chiefly the seated form, the
small cooped body, the voluminous draperies
bulging over the stool and spreading in under the
keyboard and down about the floor, the elegantly
straying arms and mincing hands, the arch swaying
of the head and shoulders, the face bent delicately
in the becoming play of light.... She
opened the lid. It went back from the keys till
<a class="pagenum" title="74" id="page-74"/>
it lay flat, presenting a little music-stand folded
into the sweep of its upper edge. Mustiness rose
from the keys. They were loose and yellow with
age. Softly struck notes shattered the silence
of the room. She stood listening with loudly
beating heart. The door would open and show a
face with surprised eyes staring into her betrayed
consciousness. The house remained silent. Her
fingers strayed forward and ran up a scale. The
notes were all run down but they rang fairly true
to each other.
</p>
<p>
<a id="corr-8"/>Moszkowski’s Serenade sounded fearfully 
pathetic;
as if the piano were heart-broken. It could
be made to do better. Both the pedals worked,
the soft one producing a woolly sweetness, the
loud a metallic shallow brilliance of tone. She
shut the heavy softly closing loose-handled door
very carefully. Its cold china knob told her
callously that her real place was in the little room
upstairs with the bedroom crockery cold in the
mid-morning light. But she had already shut the
door. She came shyly back to the piano and sat
down and played carefully and obediently piece
after piece remembered from her schooldays. They
left the room triumphantly silent and heavy all
round her. If she got up and went away it would
<a class="pagenum" title="75" id="page-75"/>
be as if she had not played at all. She could not
sit here playing Chopin. It would be like deliberately
speaking a foreign language suddenly, to
assert yourself. Playing pianissimo she slowly
traced a few phrases of a nocturne. They revealed
all the flat dejection of the register. With
the soft pedal down she pressed out the notes in a
vain attempt to key them up. Through their
mournful sagging the magic shape came out. She
could not stay her hands. Presently she no longer
heard the false tones. The notes sounded soft and
clear and true into her mind weaving and interweaving
the sight of moonlit waters, the sound of
summer leaves flickering in the darkness, the
trailing of dusk across misty meadows, the stealing
of dawn over grass, the faint vision of the Taj
Mahal set in dark trees, white Indian moonlight
outlining the trees and pouring over the pale
facade; over all a hovering haunting consoling
voice pure and clear, in a shape, passing as the
pictures faintly came and cleared and melted and
changed upon a vast soft darkness, like a silver
thread through everything in the world. Closing
in upon her from the schoolgirl pieces still echoing
in the room came sudden abrupt little scenes
from all the levels of her life, deep-rooted
<a class="pagenum" title="76" id="page-76"/>
moments still alive within her challenging and
promising as when she had left them, driven
relentlessly on.... The last chord of the nocturne
brought the room sharply back. It was
unchanged; lifeless and unmoved; nothing had
passed to it from the little circle where she sat
enclosed.... Her heart swelled and tears rose
in her eyes. The room was old and experienced,
full like her inmost mind of the unchanging past.
Nothing in her life had any meaning for it. It
waited impassively for the passing to and fro of
people who would leave no impression. She had
exposed herself and it meant nothing in the room.
Life had passed her by and her playing had
become a sentimental exhibition of unneeded
life.... She was wretched and feeble and tired....
Life <em>has</em> passed me by; that is the truth.
I am no longer a person. My playing would be
the nauseating record of an uninteresting failure
to people who have lived or a pandering to the
sentimental memories of people whom life has
passed by ...—you played that like a snail
crossed in love—perhaps he was right. But
something had gone wrong because I played with
the intention of commenting on Alma’s way of
playing.... That was not all. It did not
<a class="pagenum" title="77" id="page-77"/>
end there. There was something in music when
one played alone, without thoughts. Something
present, and <em>new</em>. Not affected by life or by any
kind of people.... In Beethoven. <em>Beethoven</em>
was the answer to the silence of the room. She
imagined a sonata ringing out into it, and
defiantly attacked a remembered fragment. It
crashed into the silence. The uncaring room
might rock and sway. Its rickety furniture
shatter to bits. <em>Something</em> must happen under
the outbreak of her best reality. She was on firm
ground. The room was nowhere. She cast sidelong
half-fearful exultant glances. The room
woke into an affronted silence. She felt astonishment
at the sudden loud outbreak of assertions
turning to scornful disgust. Entrenched
behind the disgust something was declaring that
she had no right to her understanding of the
music; no business to get away into it and hide
her defects and get out of things and escape the
proper exposure of her failure. In a man it would
have been excusable. The room would have
listened with respectful flattering indulgent
tolerance till it was over and then have relapsed
untouched. This dingy woman playing with the
directness and decision of a man was like some
<a class="pagenum" title="78" id="page-78"/>
strange beast in the room.... It was too late
to go back. She could only rush on re-affirming
her assertion, shouting in a din that must be reaching
up and down the house and echoing out into
the street the thing that was stronger than the
feeling that had prompted her appeal for sympathy.
It was the everlasting parting of the ways,
the wrenching away that always came.... The
Baileys were going on downstairs with their
planning, the Norwegian busy with his cold
watchful grappling with England; all of them
far away, flouted. The room became a background
indistinguishable from any other indifferent
background. All round her was height and
depth, a sense of vastness and grandeur beyond
anything to be seen or heard, yet stretching back
like a sheltering wing over the past to her earliest
memories and forward ahead out of sight. The
piano had changed. It gave out a depth and
fulness of tone. By careful management she
could avoid the abrupt contrast between the
action of the pedals. Presently the glowing and
aching of the muscles of her forearms forced her
to leave off. She swung round. The forgotten
room was filled with friendly light. Triumphant
echoes filled its wide spaces, pressed against the
<a class="pagenum" title="79" id="page-79"/>
windows, filtered out into the quiet street out
and away into London. When the room was
still there was an unbroken stillness in the house
and the street. Striking thinly across it came the
tones of the solitary unaccompanied violin.
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-3">
<a class="pagenum" title="80" id="page-80"/>
CHAPTER III
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-3-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> let herself cautiously in. The
whole house was hers; she was a <em>boarder</em>;
but the right to linger freely in any part of it was
bought by Sissie’s French lessons and being
Sissie’s teacher meant that the Baileys could
approach familiarly at any moment ...
all her privileges were bought with a heavy
price, here and at Wimpole Street ... it’s
us; our family; always masquerading. But the
lessons made opportunities of being affable to the
Baileys; removing the need for seeking them out
purposely from time to time. Cut and dried.
I’ve <em>pa</em>triotic ballads cut and dried. I’m cut and
dried, everybody thinks. Moving and speaking
stiffly, the stamp of my family, the minute anything
is expected of me. Nobody knows me. I
grow more and more unknown and more and
more like what people think of me.... But <em>I</em>
know; and things go on coming; scraps of other
people’s things. No one in the world could
<a class="pagenum" title="81" id="page-81"/>
imagine what it is to me to have this house; the
fag-end of the Baileys’ stock-in-trade. God
couldn’t know, completely. There’s something
wrong about it; but damn, I can’t help it. In
my secret self I should love a prison. Walls.
What <em>are</em> walls?
</p>
<p>
If she scuffed her muddy shoes too cheerfully
someone would appear at the dining-room door.
Beyond the gaslight pouring down on to the
smeary marble of the hall table and glimmering
against the threatening dining-room door the
dim staircase beckoned her up into darkness. A
few steps and she would be going upstairs.
Where? What for? Hgh—HEE! at the far
end of the passage beyond the hall.... There
was a line of bright light there, coming through
the chink of the little door usually hidden in the
darkness beyond where the Baileys disappeared
down the basement stairs. Then there was a
<em>room</em> there.... The little door was pushed
open and a man’s figure stood outlined against the
bright light and disappeared, shutting the door.
There had been a table and a lamp upon it ...
the sound of the laugh rang in her head; a single
lively deep-chested note followed by a falsetto
note that curved hysterically up. Men; gentlemen.
<a class="pagenum" title="82" id="page-82"/>
How long had they been there? They
would not stay. How had they come? Where
had Mrs. Bailey found them? Had they already
found out that it was not their sort of house?
<a id="corr-12"/>Whom were they afraid of shocking with their
refinement and freedom? They were making
a bright little world in there by feeling themselves
surrounded by people who would be
shocked. They did not know there was someone
there they could not shock.... She imagined
herself in the doorway ... <em>hullo</em>! Fancy
you <em>here</em>.... The dining-room door had opened
and Mrs. Bailey was standing in the hall with the
door open behind her. Miriam was not prepared
with a refusal of the invitation to come in.
She glanced over Mrs. Bailey’s shoulder and saw
the two girls sitting at the fireside. Two letters
on the hall table addressed to the Norwegian
told her that the Baileys were alone. She yielded
to Mrs. Bailey’s delighted manner and went in.
She would stay, keeping on her outdoor things,
long enough to hear about the new people. The
close sickly sweet air of the room closed oppressively
round her heavy garments—Here you are
young lady sit here—said Mrs. Bailey piloting
her to a chair in front of the fire. There was a
<a class="pagenum" title="83" id="page-83"/>
stranger sitting at the fireside. Mr. Mendizabble
murmured Mrs. Bailey as Miriam sat down.
Miriam’s affronted eyes took in the figure of a man
sitting on the wooden stool crowded in between
the mantelpiece and the easy chair occupied by
Sissie; a man from a café ... a foreign
waiter in his best clothes, sheeny stripy harsh
pale grey, a crimson waistcoat showing up the
gleam of a gold watch-chain, and crimson cloth
slippers; an Italian, a Frenchman, a French-Swiss.
He was sitting bent conversationally
forward with his elbows on his knees and his
hands clasped; quite at home. They had evidently
been sitting there all the evening. The
air was thick with their intercourse. Miriam
received an abrupt nod in answer to her murmur
and her stiff bow and followed with resentful
curiosity the little foreign tune the man began
humming far away in his head. He had not even
glanced her way and the tune was his response to
Mrs. Bailey’s introduction. The remains of a
derisive smile seemed to snort from the firmly
sweeping white nostrils above his tiny trim
bushily upward curving black moustache. It
moulded the strong closed lips and shone behind
the whole of his curiously square evenly modelled
<a class="pagenum" title="84" id="page-84"/>
face. The Bailey girls were watching him with
shiny flushed cheeks and bright eyes. His skin
was white and clean ... mat; like felt
... untouched and untried in the exhausted
air of the shabby room. An insolent waiter.
He had turned away towards the fire after his
nod. From under a firm black-lashed white lid
a bright dark eye gazed derision into the flames.
</p>
<p>
Go on Mr. Mendizzable smiled Mrs. Bailey
brushing at her skirt with her handkerchief—we
are most interested.
</p>
<p>
Hay, madame that is all, he laughed derisively
in rich singing swaying tones towards the middle
of the hearthrug—I skate from one end of their
canal to another, faster than them all. I win their
prize. Je m’en fiche—
</p>
<p>
You skated all the way along the canal.—
</p>
<p>
Ieeea skate their can<em>al</em>. That was Amsterdam.
I do many things there. I edit their newspaper.
I conduct a café.
</p>
<p>
Mts. You <em>have</em> had some adventures—
</p>
<p>
That was not adventures in Amsterdam mon
dieu! He swayed drumming from foot to foot
in time to his shouts. Had he really beaten those
wonderful skaters? Perhaps he had not. She
glanced at his brow calm, firm, dead white under
<a class="pagenum" title="85" id="page-85"/>
the soft crisply ridged black hair. Perhaps he was
Dutch; and that was why he looked common and
also refined.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-3-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
At ten o’clock the youngest girl was sent to bed.
Miriam scornfully watched herself miss her
opportunity of getting away. She sat fascinated,
resenting the interruption; enviously filching
the gay outbreaking kindness that robbed the
departure of humiliation and sent the girl away
counting on to-morrow. He went out of his way
to make <em>Polly Bailey</em> happy ... and sat on by
the dying fire unwearied, freshly humming to
himself towards the dingy hearth scattered thinly
with sparse dusty ash. Mrs. Bailey returned,
raked together the remains of the fire and settled
herself in her chair with a shiver. In a moment
she would begin her questionings and the voice
would sound again.—You cold mother darling?
Come nearer the fire—Mrs. Bailey pulled her
chair a few inches forward arching her neck and
smiling her bright sweet smile—Oogh, its
parky upstairs—Miriam implored herself to go.
Parky, reiterated Mrs. Bailey uncertainly, glancing
daintily from side to side and smiling away a yawn
<a class="pagenum" title="86" id="page-86"/>
behind her small rough reddened hand—Parky?
What is parky?—<em>Parky</em>, said Mrs. Bailey, <em>cold</em>;
like a park—Ah, I see. That is good. When I
go upstairs I go to Hyde Park.... I shall have
in my bedroom a band and a mass meeting, and
a policeman. Salvation Army Band. Miriam
sat stiffly through the laughter of the Baileys.
Her refusal to join brought the discomforting
realisation of having laughed, several times during
the past hour. She had laughed in spite of herself,
flinging her laughter out across the hearthrug
towards the dying fire, leading the laughter of the
Baileys, holding them off and herself apart. Now
suddenly by refusing to share their laughter when
they led the way she had openly separated herself
from them. Then they knew she stayed on under
a charm. They had witnessed her theft from
the wealth <em>they</em> had provided, her gratitude
to him for the store of memories she had
gathered. It was the price. It stung and tried
to humiliate her. She sat steadily on, flouting
it. The grouping would not recur. Why did
not Mrs. Bailey make him go on talking? A cold
gloom spread sideways from the polished arch
of the grate, encroaching on the corner where
he sat drumming and humming. She drew her
<a class="pagenum" title="87" id="page-87"/>
eyes with an air of absorption towards the dying
fire. Its aspect was unendurably bleak. Her
mind shrank from it, only to meet the sense of the
cold darkness waiting upstairs. Mrs. Bailey’s
voice bridged the emptiness. Some inner link
was restored. Somewhere in her voice was something
that rang restoringly round the world. The
disconnected narrative was flowing again. The
chilly hearth glowed with a small dull brilliance....
The foreign voice went on and on, narrative
dialogue commentary running flowing leaping, in
the voice that rang whatever it said in bright
sunshine. She listened openly, apologising in
swift affectionate glances for her stiff middle-class
resentment of his vulgar appearance. Was he
vulgar? She tried in vain to recall her first
impression. That curious blending of sturdy
strength and polished refinement in the handsome
head was something well-known in the head of
a friend. She forced her friends to apologise
and submit to the charm....
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-3-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
It was nearly midnight. The grey of to-morrow
morning kept pressing on her attention. She
gathered herself together to go, and rose reluctantly.
<a class="pagenum" title="88" id="page-88"/>
The outer chill came down to meet her
rising form. The glow of life was left there at
the heart of the circle by the fire. The little man
leapt up—Hah, <em>good</em> night all—and pushed
past her and out of the room. Mrs. Bailey had
made some remark towards her as she neared the
door. She professed not to hear and went slowly
on in the wake of the footsteps leaping up the
dark flights. They crossed the landing next below
hers and ceased. When she rounded the stairs
light blazed from a wide-open door and a little
melody sounded for an instant in a smooth swaying
falsetto. As soon as she had passed, the door was
violently slammed ... all those stories were
<em>true</em>. And the first one about the skating. She
imagined the white brow under a fur cap and the
square short strong well-knit form swaying
strongly from side to side, on and on, ironically
winning.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-3-4">
4
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Sissie read her set of phrases in heavy docility.
Her will and the shapeless colourless voice murmuring
from the back of her throat were given
to the lesson; but the kindly sullen profile
smouldered in slumber. Miriam pondered at
<a class="pagenum" title="89" id="page-89"/>
ease, contrasting the two voices as they placed one
after the other the little trite sentences upon the
empty air. That Sissie should speak her French in
the worst kind of English way did not really
matter. But why was it? What did it mean?
They all had something in common—all the
people who spoke French like that ... a
slender young man darted noiselessly into the
room and began busily dusting the sideboard.
He was wearing a striped cotton jacket. Mrs.
Bailey had engaged a manservant.... It was
impossible. He would not be able to be kept.
It was like a play. He was like a character in a
farce, rushing on and whisking things about. It
was a play; amateur theatricals, Mrs. Bailey
rushing radiantly about, stage-managing. It was
pretending things were different when they were
not; breaking up the atmosphere of the house.
Where did she get her ideas?... Coming
back to her surveillance she listened intently.
Wait a minute, she said, we will begin all over
again. I see exactly what it is. There’s no
difficulty. You can learn all about pronunciation
in a few minutes. Sissie had started. Controlling
herself she took her attention from the book long
enough to give Miriam a sympathetic glancing
<a class="pagenum" title="90" id="page-90"/>
smile. Let the words <em>ring</em> in your head, <em>into</em> your
nose and against your forehead. Sissie sat back
smiling, and sat watching Miriam’s face. It’s
<em>we</em> who speak <em>through</em> the nose. And mouth.
In gusts, whoof, whoof, from the chest all sound
and no enunciation. Sissie’s eyes were roving
intently about Miriam’s face. They <em>stop</em> the
breath at the lips and in the nose. Bong. That’s
through the nose. <em>Bon!</em> D’you hear; like a
little explosion. Hold the lips tight before the
b and explode the word up into the nose partly
closing the back of the throat and mouth. It’s
all like that and the pronunciation does not vary.
When you know the few rules and get the vowels
pure and explode the consonants, that’s all there
is. Sissie waited, controlling an apologetic smile.
She had realised nothing but the violent outburst
and was secretly laughing over the idea of explosions....
Say matin, suggested Miriam patiently.
Mattong, murmured Sissie. Say mattah,
persisted Miriam. The youth came flourishing in
with the coal box. That’s right. Now try
forcing the ah up into your nose and shutting
your nose on it. It’s time to lay the table Emyou,
stated Sissie reprovingly towards the hearthrug.
Pliz?—The young man reared a mild fair
<a class="pagenum" title="91" id="page-91"/>
crested head above the rim of the table. Lay
the table, tarb, paw dinnay snapped Sissie. I
shall have to go Miss Henderson she added,
getting gently up and ambling to the door. The
young man shot murmuring from the room.
They appeared to collide in the hall. Miriam
found herself in the midst of a train of thought
that had distracted her during her morning’s
work. <em>Cosmopolis</em>, she scribbled in her note-book.
The world of science and art is the true cosmopolis.
Those were not the words in “Cosmopolis” but
it was the idea. Perhaps no one had thought of
it before the man who thought of having the
magazine in three languages. It would be one
of the new ideas. Tearing off the page she laid it
on the sofa-head and sat contemplating an
imagined map of Europe with London Paris and
Berlin joined by a triangle, the globe rounding
vaguely off on either side. All over the globe,
dotted here and there were people who read and
thought, making a network of unanimous culture.
It was a tiring reflection; but it brought a
comfortable assurance that somewhere beyond
the hurrying confusion of everyday life something
was being done quietly in a removed real world
that led the other world. People arrived independently
<a class="pagenum" title="92" id="page-92"/>
at the same conclusions in different
languages and in the world of science they communicated
with each other. That made Cosmopolis.
Yet it was an awful thought that the world
might gradually become all one piece; perhaps
with one language; perhaps English if those
people were right who talked about Anglo-Saxon
supremacy. “England and America together
could rule the world.” It sounded secure and
comforting, like a police-station; it would be
wonderful to belong to the race whose language
was spoken all over the world. All the foreigners
would simply have to become English. But that
brought a dreadful sense of loss. Foreign languages
had a beauty that could not be found in English,
and the world would be <em>ruled</em> by the kind of English
people who could never get the sound of a foreign
word and who therefore had all sorts of appalling
obliviousness.
</p>
<p>
“You write that miss?”
</p>
<p>
Yes, said Miriam leaping through surprise
and indignation to delight. Sissie and Emile
were back again in the room hurrying and angry.
The little man bid them a loud good-evening; a
tablecloth was flountering out across the large
table. Miriam returned to her note-book. He
<a class="pagenum" title="93" id="page-93"/>
was <em>writing</em>, with a scrap of pencil taken from
his pocket, on her piece of paper, held against
the wall. There miss he shouted gruffly, handing
it to her. Lies, she read; scribbled in
a rounded hand across her words, and underneath—there
is NO Cosmopolis. Bernard
Mendizabal.
</p>
<p>
Oh yes, there <em>is</em> a cosmopolis argued Miriam
looking up and out from a whirl of convincing
images. He was walking about in the window
space in his extraordinary clothes, short and
somehow too square for his clothes, making his
clothes look square. His square roundly modelled
head was changeably sculptured by the gaslight
as he paced up and down. His distinction seemed
to be sharpened by her words as she said vous
avez tort monsieur. She had a sense of Emile and
Sissie glancing and affronted while she slid down
her sentence to leap, flouting them, forsaking her
crowding thoughts, and catch at any cost, the joy
of saying and hearing no matter what, in foreign
speech. She would pay for the moment any
price to make it sound and keep it sounding in
the room. The spaces of her separate life in the
house became a background for this familiar
forgotten joy so unexpectedly renewed.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="94" id="page-94"/>
“<em>No</em> miss!” shouted Mr. Mendizabal. She
cast a fierce general scowl towards his promenading
figure. He was another of those foreigners
who care for nothing in England but
practising English. Then she would fight her
theory.
</p>
<p>
“Je n’ai pas tort” he thundered, standing
before her with his hands in his pockets. He was
taking her French for granted. In her thankfulness
she sat docile before a torrent of words
taking in nothing of their meaning, throwing out
provisional phrases according to his tone of
question or assertion. The Baileys coming in and
out of the room would see “an animated French
conversation” and Sissie and Emile would forget
her desperate onslaught in their admiration of
the spectacle. The more she kept it glowing and
emphatic and alive the further she was redeemed.
She gave no glance their way. Dinner must be
almost ready. Soon she would have to go. The
gong would tell her. Till then she could remain
immersed in the tide of words. The little man
was earnest and enraged. He used his French
easily and fluently. It was not wonderful to him
suddenly to become French, to feel the things he
expressed change, become clear neat patterns, lose
<a class="pagenum" title="95" id="page-95"/>
some of their meaning, fall open to attack; the
pain of the failure of words so set out, was made
bearable by the wonder of the journey from
speech to speech. He remained himself, apparently
unaware of the change of environment, or
indifferent to it.... <em>En déche</em> what did that
mean? Vous devez me voir en déche. You
ought to see me en déche. That seemed to be
his summing up, the basis of his denial of a
cosmopolis. She attended. The only way he
declared, as if recalling an earlier assertion, of
proving the indifference of everyone to everyone
else is to be en déche. Smiling comprehensively
just before he turned on his heel and swung
round, she drifted out of the room amidst the
clangour of the gong ... en déche ...
déchéance? ... somehow at a disadvantage.
She thought her written phrases in French.
They sounded a little grandiloquent. Someone
seemed to be declaiming them from a platform.
He probably had not realised what she was trying
to say. But he was a cosmopolitan, and he denied
that there was any cosmopolis, any sympathy
between races, even between individuals. He
was a pessimist. With all his charm and zest he
believed in nothing and nobody. And he spoke
<a class="pagenum" title="96" id="page-96"/>
from experience. Perhaps it was only in thoughts
not in life that these things existed. People
talked about cosmopolis because they wanted to
believe it. Had he said that?
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-4">
<a class="pagenum" title="97" id="page-97"/>
CHAPTER IV
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-4-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">S</span><span class="postfirstchar">itting</span> down almost the moment Mr.
Mendizabal brought him into the room and
playing <em>Wagner</em>. With many wrong notes and
stumbling phrases, but self-forgetfully, in the
foreign way. Keeping bravely on, making the
shape come even in the most difficult parts. He
was hearing the Queen’s Hall Orchestra all the
time, and he knew that anyone who knew it could
hear it too. He was one of those people who stand
in the arena and talk about the music and know
that there are piano scores and get them and
play them. It was amazing that there should be
piano scores of Wagner. Did he play because he
wanted to remember the orchestra; without
thinking of the people who were listening. He
did not know the Baileys and their boarders. He
could not imagine how extraordinary it was to
hear Wagner in the room, suddenly offered to
the <em>Baileys</em>. They knew something important
<a class="pagenum" title="98" id="page-98"/>
was going on; sitting close round the piano
surprised and attentive, busily speculating, in
scraps, hampered by the need to appear to be
listening. Afterwards they would talk to him
arching and laughing, Mr. Mendizabal’s friend.
Perhaps he would come and play Wagner again;
there would be music in the room undisturbed
by their forced attention. This was only a
beginning.
</p>
<p>
At the end of the overture he sat quite still,
making no movement of turning towards the
room. The group about the piano were taken by
surprise, waiting for him to turn. When they
began making exclamations his hands were on
the piano again. The room was silenced by
strange little sentences of music. He played
short fragments, unfamiliar things with strange
phrasing, difficult to trace, unmelodious, but
haunted by suggested melody; a curious flattened
wandering abrupt intimate message in their
phrases; perhaps Russian or Brahms. Not
Wagner writing down the world in sound nor
Beethoven speaking to one person. Other foreign
musicians, set apart, glancing, and listening to
strange single things, speaking in pain, just out
of clear hearing, their speech unfinished. Russian
<a class="pagenum" title="99" id="page-99"/>
or Hungarian. Dvor-tchak. I will ask him.
Perhaps he plays Chopin.
</p>
<p>
The Baileys were growing weary of listening.
They were becoming strangers in their own
dining-room, with a wonderful important evening
going on all round them. Miriam consulted
Sissie, probing enviously for the dark busy
sulkily hidden thoughts going to and fro behind
her attitude of listening. Her eyes were drawing
pictures of Mr. Bowdoin’s back view and noting
his movements. Mrs. Bailey was still smiling her
pride. Her tired eyes were strained brightly
towards the performance with the proper expression
of delighted appreciation. But now and
again they moved observantly across the slender
shabby form and revealed her circling thoughts.
When she looked at the back of the thatch of
soft fine fair hair she was seeing that officeful of
men painting posters, the first arrival of Mr.
Mendizabal, their resentment of his quick work,
the poster he thought of in the night, here, and
worked out at the office in an hour, the musician
playing so gravely not knowing that he was being
seen as the man who was forced by Mr. Mendizabal
to play a Beethoven Sonata on the typewriter
with his hair in curl-papers. If Mrs. Bailey went
<a class="pagenum" title="100" id="page-100"/>
too deeply into her speculations she would be too
confused to ask him to come again. Perhaps Mr.
Mendizabal would bring him anyhow. He was
lounging back in his chair with his hands in his
pockets. His face seemed to be laughing ironically
behind a proud smile. He respected music. He
admired Bowdoin for his talent. He was showing
him off. It was charming ... like Trilby.
Men laughing at each other and admiring each
other.... She had left off listening. Mr.
Bowdoin was sitting there at her side, separate
from his music, sitting there English, a little
altered by going out into foreign music. A sort of
foreigner with an English expression. Her glance
had shown her an English profile, a blunted
irregular aquiline, a little defaced about the
mouth and chin by the influence on the
muscles of a common way of speaking. But
the back of his head was foreign, the outline
of his skull fine and delicate, a delicate arch at
the top and the back flattened a little under
the soft fall of hair. He was stopping. He
sat still, facing the piano. There were stirrings
and murmurs and uncertain attempts at applause.
Mr. Mendizabal rose and stood over him, as if
to smite him on the shoulder. What do you think
<a class="pagenum" title="101" id="page-101"/>
about when you play <em>Beethoven</em>?—said Miriam
hastily. His face came round and Mr. Mendizabal
turned hilariously away to the room.—By-toven
himself I think said Mr. Bowdoin quietly.—If I
get a Beethoven’s Sonatas would you play one?—I
<em>will</em> play one for you. But not this evening I
think—He turned back to the piano and Miriam
gazed at his indrawn profile. He was quite
English and had all the English thoughts and
feelings about the little group gathered behind
him in the room. But there was something
besides. He was a musician and that made him
understand. He knew the room was impervious
to music and was ill at ease after the first joy of
playing, and could not convince his hearers by
vitality and exuberance as a foreigner would do
even with quite fragile subdued delicately controlled
music. If you care about music he said
towards the piano, will you come one evening
and let me play to you on my own piano? I
should like it more than anything said Miriam,
quivering, and clenching her clasped hands. It
will be an honour and a great pleasure to me if you
will come he said in his quiet weary voice. I will
take the liberty of writing to suggest an evening.
Miriam’s abrupt rising and blind movement
<a class="pagenum" title="102" id="page-102"/>
left her standing opposite the lady-help, who was
standing with a foot on the fender and an elbow
on the mantelpiece, on the other side of the
hearthrug. After only two days in the house she
seemed already more at home than the Baileys;
talking derisively across at Mr. Mendizabal who
was marching up and down the far side of the
room with his hands in pockets shouting raillery
and snorting. D’you like London Miss Scott?
said Miriam uncontrollably to her averted talking
face. Miss Scott completed her sally; the
Baileys were talking to Mr. Bowdoin, just behind
at the piano. Perhaps no one had witnessed her
wild attack. But she could not take her eyes off
Miss Scott’s face. It turned towards her still
wearing its derisive smile. What was that you
said Miss Henderson I beg your pardon, she stated
encouragingly. She was not in the least impressed
by being spoken to. Her swift amused glance was
all she could manage without breaking into
shouts of laughter. Her laughter-shaken person
was the front of a barricade of derision.
Miriam repeated her question, fearfully consulting
the small sheeny satin dress, with the lace
collar, the neat slipper on the fender, the heavy
little fringe stopping abruptly at the hollow
<a class="pagenum" title="103" id="page-103"/>
temples above high cheekbones and slightly
hollow cheeks and leading back to a tiny knot at
the top of the head. Perhaps she was a lady. Ye
see so little of it unless yerra wealthy, she said
in curious tonguey tones, standing upright on the
hearthrug and flinging back her head with every
other word; backing away with a balancing
movement from foot to foot. She laughed on
her last word and stood shaking with laughter,
her elbow on the far corner of the mantelshelf
and her foot once more on the fender. Perhaps
she was still laughing at some jest of Mr. Mendizabal’s.
Arrya fond of London Miss Henderson,
she chuckled and went on without waiting for
an answer, with rhythmically flinging head,—it’s
ahl very well if ya can go out to theeaturras and
consurruts and out and about; but when the
season comes and the people are in the parruk
and in thayre grand houses having parrties and
gaities and yew’ve just got to do nothing I think
its draydefle.—She laughed consumedly, throwing
back her head. Miriam got herself across the
room and outside the door. On the hall table lay
a letter; from Eve; witnessing her discomfort;
soothing, and reproaching.... Eve would
have stayed and talked to the musician.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="104" id="page-104"/>
Up in her cold room everything vanished into
the picture of Eve, deciding away down in green
Wiltshire, to leave off teaching; smiling, stretching
out her firm small hands and taking hold of
<em>London</em>. London changed as she read. She sat
stupefied. It seemed impossible, terrifying, that
Eve penniless, with her uncertain health should
leave the wealthy comfort of the Greens after all
these years. Too excited to read word by word
she scanned the pages and learned that Madame
Leroy a friend of Mrs. Green who had a flower
shop in Bruton Street had engaged her....
<em>I decorated the table for dinner each night when she
was here at Christmas ... the Greens have
been charming, quite excited about the plans</em> ...
coming up <em>next week</em>.... Miriam leapt to her
feet and began hastily putting on her things.
“Eve is coming to London for a six months’
course in floral decorations. She is putting up at
a hostel.” She pulled on her cold sodden shoes.
“Eve is going to be an assistant in a flower shop at
fifteen shillings a week. She has taken a cubicle
at a branch of the Young Women’s Bible Association.”
By the time she was ready she felt she must
have dreamed the news. Eve, not a governess,
free, in London, just as she was herself. Another
<a class="pagenum" title="105" id="page-105"/>
self, in London. Eve being led about and taught
London, going about under the same skies, in the
streets, feeling exactly as she felt. Nothing would
have changed before she came. The rain gently
thudding on the roof and rattling against the
landing skylight was Eve’s rain. She was listening
to it and hearing it in exactly the same way....
</p>
<p>
The girls did not realise the news at all. They
kept going off into questions about details until
the fact of Eve’s coming disappeared altogether
and only Eve’s point of view and Eve’s courage
and her difficulties remained.... One had <a id="corr-18"/>told it
the wrong way. Better not to have given any
facts at all but just to have said Eve’s coming to
London; isn’t it weird? But then they would
have said is she coming to London to see the
Queen? The Queen. That would have been
true. She was coming to London partly to see
the Queen. Perhaps the trouble was that they
had been cheated by not being told exactly how
Eve was only just managing to come at all and
how scraped everything would be. But at least
they realised that one had people belonging to
one who made up their minds and did definite
things, like other people. It was amazing to
decide to come to London and be a florist;
<a class="pagenum" title="106" id="page-106"/>
<em>Napoleon</em>. They realised that and nothing else.
She would be able to tell Mr. Hancock on Monday;
first him, first thing in the morning and the
Orlys during the day.
</p>
<p>
Mr. Hancock understood at once, making no
response at all at first and then standing quietly
about near her as she busied herself with her
dusting really giving himself to taking in the
simple stupendous fact; and really realising it
before asking any questions and asking them in a
tone that showed he knew what it meant and going
on showing all day in his manner that he knew
what it was that kept her so brisk about her work.
He was divine; he was a divine person. She
would never forget being able to say just anyhow,
h’m, I’ve got a <em>sister</em> coming to London; and
his immediate silent approach across the room,
drying his hands.... Of <em>course</em> the Orlys
immediately said Oh how nice for you, you won’t
be so lonely. <em>What</em> did people mean about loneliness?
It was always the people arranged in
groups and seeming so lost and isolated and lonely
who said that.... To-night she would
begin turning out her room for Eve’s reception.
No. It was the Dante lecture.... The day
Eve came she would buy some flowers. She
<a class="pagenum" title="107" id="page-107"/>
understood now why people wanted to put
flowers in their rooms when people were coming.
She would be a hostess. Some people bought
flowers and carried them home when they were
alone.... It must be like inviting a guest to
keep you company. Like saying you were alone
and not liking being alone and putting flowers
about to tell you all the time that you did not
want to be alone but were. People <em>talked</em> about
these things. “I always buy flowers when I am
alone.” Like suddenly taking off all their things
and showing that they had a crooked body. If
they were really miserable about being alone
they would be too miserable to buy flowers. If
they really wanted the flowers enough to buy them
they were already not alone. If they bought the
flowers in that fussy excited thoughtless way
people seemed to do things they were neither
really ever alone or ever really with people ...
they were in that sort of state that made social
life a talkative nothingness sliding about on
nothing....
</p>
<p>
At the end of the afternoon she wandered
forgetfully into the warmth of the empty waiting-room.
The house was silent. Her footsteps
made no sound along the carpeted hall and were
<a class="pagenum" title="108" id="page-108"/>
lost in the thick <a id="corr-19"/>Turkey carpeting of the 
waiting-room
floor. The room was lit only by the firelight.
From its wide clear core striped by black
bars a broad rose-gold shaft glowed out across the
room reaching the copper vessels on the black oak
sideboard and the lower part of the long mirror
between the windows where the midmost piece
of copper gleamed in reflection. She stood still,
holding the warm air in her nostrils, everything
was blotted out and then restored to its place ...
what place, why was it good, what was she
trying to remember?... In the familiar
fire-lit winter darkness was a faint dry warm
scent ... mimosa. It was a repetition....
It had been there last year, suddenly;
drily fragrant in the winter darkness of the warm
room preparing for the light and warmth of the
evening. It had seemed then like some wealthy
extravagance, bringing a sense of the freedom of
wealth to have things out of season, and a keen
sudden memory in the dark London room of the
unspoken inexpressible beauty of Newlands ...
its soft-toned softly carpeted and curtained effect,
fragrant with clusters of winter flowers, standing
complete somewhere in the secret black spaces of
her mind.... But now here it was again,
<a class="pagenum" title="109" id="page-109"/>
just at the same moment, just before the winter
darkness began to give way. Perhaps mimosa
came at this time of year suddenly in the shops,
before the spring flowers, and careful people like
Mrs. Orly could buy it ... then in London
mimosa was the sign of <em>spring</em>. It was like the
powdery fragrance of a clear warm midsummer
evening, like petal-dust; pollen-dust; the whole
summer circling in the glow of firelight. Then
Eve would not come this winter. The darkest
secret winter-time of London was over again. It
would come again in single moments and groups
of days, but its time was gone. The moment
of realisation of spring had come by surprise;
there lay all the spring days ahead leading on to
summer spread out for anyone to see, calling to
Eve or to anyone who might have come into the
room to whom one could have said doesn’t the
smell of mimosa make you realise the winter is
over; and here within, lit up as if by a suddenly
switched on electric light was one’s own real
realisation going back and back; in pictures that
grew clearer, each time something happened that
switched on a light within the black spaces of
your mind. Things that no one could share,
coming again and again just as some outside thing
<a class="pagenum" title="110" id="page-110"/>
was beginning to interest you, as if to <em>remind</em> you
that the inmost reality comes to you when you
are alone.... The prospect of Eve’s coming
was changed. The pang of the mimosa came
nearer than anything she could bring. Perhaps
it would be possible to tell her about this moment?
Perhaps her coming had made it more real. Yet
now it did not seem to matter so much whether
she came or not. In a way it seemed as though
the fact of her coming threatened something.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-4-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
“Antoine Bowdoin.” If she had had a solemn
letter from him first she would never have undertaken
to go and hear him play. The formal
courtly old-fashioned phrases had nothing to do
with the hours of music. She had thought of
nothing but the music on the good piano and
now when she had forgotten all about it there
was this awful result; the “few friends”
gathered together in his room on a fixed date so
that she might go and hear him play. She would
have to sit, with a party, and afterwards find
something to say.... An Englishman, solemn
and polite, playing foreign music, with English
<a class="pagenum" title="111" id="page-111"/>
friends politely and solemnly sitting round.
There was no word of Mr. Mendizabal. He
was not going. If he had been Mr. Bowdoin
would not have said I will call at six-thirty for
the purpose of escorting you to my rooms. He
was like a gaoler. Perhaps the walk would be an
opportunity of getting over nervousness. There
would be music at once, no meal to get through.
She would thank him very much for the great
treat and when it was over there would only be
Eve and the accomplishment of having heard a
good piano played by a musician. He could be
dropped.... He could be asked to come just
once and play for Eve. That would be a great
London evening for Eve.... The sense of
a complex London life crowded with engagements
made her pace in spite of her weariness
up and down the platform at Gower Street. Its
familiar sulphurous gloom, the platform lights
shining murkily from the midst of slowly rolling
clouds of grey smoke, the dark forms and phantom
white faces of waiting passengers emerging
suddenly as she threaded the darkness, revived
her. By the time the train rolled slowly in behind
its beloved black dumpy high-shouldered engine
with its large unshrieking mushroom bell-whistle
<a class="pagenum" title="112" id="page-112"/>
the journey had changed from being an expedition
to a spot within five minutes’ walk of Sarah’s,
unconfessed to Sarah, and had become a journey
on the Metropolitan; going indeed outside the
radius into blackness, but going so far only
because the Dante lecture, wandered out of
London was waiting there; and to be repeated at
the end of the evening safely returning through
increasing gloom until the climax of Gower
Street was reached again.... Miss Scott
was <em>Scotch</em>.
</p>
<p>
She reached the little hall in the suburban road
in good time and sat in a forward row staring at
the little platform where presently the educative
voice would be standing. She was conscious of a
stirring and buzzing all about her that had been
absent in the London hall. The first series of
lectures had not brought any sense of an audience.
Here the many audible centres of culture, the
eager discussions and sudden incisive remarks, the
triumphant intensity on the faces of some of the
women caught as she glanced now and then fearfully
about, the curious happy briskness of the
men, made her feel that the lecturer was superfluous.
All these people were the cultured
refined kind who did not trouble much about
<a class="pagenum" title="113" id="page-113"/>
their clothes. There were no furs to be seen;
the women wore large rather ugly coats or ulsters
or capes and bashed muddly looking hats and had
mufflers or long scarves. In the London audience
herself and her clothes had been invisible, here
they were just right, a sort of hall-mark. In her
black dress with her clumsy golf-cape thrown
back from her shoulders, her weather-worn felt
hat softened perhaps to harmony with her head
in the soft light she could perhaps pass for a
cultured person. <em>Bianchi</em> and <em>Neri</em> whispered
her neighbour eagerly in the midst of a long
sentence addressed to a girl at her side. She was
an Englishwoman. But her mind was so at home
in the Middle Ages that she spoke the names and
used the Italian pronunciation without a touch
of pedantry, and as eagerly and interestedly as
anyone else might say “they’re engaged!” The
clergyman in the row in front would drawl out
the words with an unctuous suggestion of superior
knowledge. He would use them to crush someone.
Most of the men present were a little like that,
using their knowledge like a code or a weapon.
But the women were really interested in it, they
were like people who had climbed a hill and were
eagerly intent on what they could see on the
<a class="pagenum" title="114" id="page-114"/>
other side. It was refreshing and also in some way
comforting to be with them. They represented
something in life that was going to increase.
Perhaps it would increase too much; they seemed
so headlong and unaware of anything else. Did
she want a world made up of women like this?
If she spoke to them they would assume she was
one of themselves and look busily at her with
unseeing eyes, fixed only on all the things they
thought about, until they perceived that she was
a fraud. Long intercourse with them might make
her able to talk like they did, but never to think
in the way they did. Never to have the extraordinary
busy assured appearance presented by
their persons when you could not see their eager
faces; a look that made them seem to be going
very fast in some direction that completely
satisfied them, so that if a fire broke out behind
them suddenly they would regard it not as an
adventure that might have been expected but as
an annoying interruption, like tripping over a
stone....
</p>
<p>
She could see that when he read the sonnets he
forgot how learned he was. The little lecture
had had its own fascination. But it was a lecture;
something told by a specialist to an audience.
<a class="pagenum" title="115" id="page-115"/>
This was Dante’s voice, and they all listened as
they could; the lecturer as well. All his knowledge
was put aside and he listened as he read.
She sat listening, her shocked mind still condemning
her for not having discovered for herself that
it was wrong to have a post-office savings account
and that betting and gambling and lotteries were
wrong because they produced nothing. For a
time she flashed about with the searchlight of the
new definition of vice ... money can’t produce
money ... then all trade was wrong in
some way ... dissipation of value without
production ... there was some principle
that all civilisation was breaking ... how did
this man know that it was wrong to imagine affection
if there was no affection in your life, that
dreaming and brooding was a sort of beastliness
... love was actual and practical, moving all the
spheres and informing the mind. That was true.
That was the truth about everything. But who
could attain to it? Dante knew it because he
loved Beatrice. How could humanity become
more loving? How could social life come to be
founded on love? How can I become more
loving? I do not know or love anyone but myself
... it did not mean being loved. It was
<a class="pagenum" title="116" id="page-116"/>
not anything to do with marriage. Dante only
<em>saw</em> Beatrice. But this is the awful truth; however
one may sit as if one were not condemned and
forget again. This is the difficult thing that
<em>everyone</em> has to do. Not dogmas. This man
believes that there is a God who loves and demands
that man shall be loving. That is what
will be asked. That is the judgment. It is
true because it breaks into you and condemns
you. Everything else is distraction and sham.
The humble yearning devotion in the voice
reading the lines made it a prayer, the very voice
a prayer to a spirit waiting all round, present in
himself, in every <a id="corr-22"/>one listening, in the very
atmosphere. It was there, to be had. It was like
something left far behind one on a dark road and
still there; to be had for the asking, to be had
by merely turning towards it.... She looked
into the eyes of Dante across the centuries as
into the eyes of a friend. But then these people
were the same. It was the truth about everybody
“the goodwill in all of us”....
</p>
<p>
She travelled back towards London in a dream.
Her compartment was empty. All the people
in the world, full of goodwill without troubling
or even thinking about it were away somewhere
<a class="pagenum" title="117" id="page-117"/>
else. Just as she had learned what people were
there was nobody. There was no love in her
nature. If there were any she would not have
been sitting here alone. If a man love not his
brother whom he hath seen how shall he love God
whom he hath not seen? There was a catch in
that like a riddle. Heads I win tails you lose....
If you keep quite quiet and gentle, asking for
nothing, not being anything, not holding on to
anything in your life, nor thinking about anything
in your life there is something there ...
behind you ... that must be God, the way to
Christ; the edge of the way to Christ. Keeping
quiet and coming to that you feel what you are
and that you have never begun being anything
but your evil natural self. You feel thick with
evil ... oh ... that was prayer. One
could become more loving. It is answered at
once. Just turning towards that something, in a
desire to be different, begins to change you! At
Praed Street the carriage began to fill with seated
forms. This was the beginning of new life....
Keeping perfectly still and looking at no one she
realised the presence of her fellow-travellers, all
just like herself, living from within by the contact
with the edge of Christ ... all <em>knowing</em> the
<a class="pagenum" title="118" id="page-118"/>
thing that to her was only a little flicker just
dawning in a long life of evil. It made them
kindly in the world and able to understand each
other. Perhaps it was the explanation of all the
fussing. Everyone in the world was bathed in
the light of love except herself.... It was not
certain that a whole lifetime of prayer and
gentleness and self-control would destroy enough
of the thick roots of evil in her to bring her
through into the Paradiso.... But if prayer, just
the turning away from all one knew begging to
be destroyed and made loving brought such an
immediate sense of the evil in oneself and the
good in everyone else, there was no end to what it
might do. Prayer was the work to do in life,
nothing else. But the turning to the unseen God
of love and giving up one’s self-will meant being
changed in a way one could not control or foresee;
dropping everything one had and cherished
secretly and having things only in common with
other people. It would mean going forward with
nothing into an unknown world; <em>always</em> being
agreeable, and agreeing. I <em>love</em> all these people
she murmured in her mind and felt a glow that
seemed to radiate out to all the corners of the
compartment. It’s <em>true</em>. This is life. This is
<a class="pagenum" title="119" id="page-119"/>
the only way in. It may be that I am so bad
that I can only sit with all my evil visible silent
amongst humanity for the rest of my life, learning
to love them, and then die out completely
because I am too bad to be quite new-born ...
her eyes were drawn towards the face of the
woman sitting opposite to her; a shapeless body,
a thin ravaged face strained and sheeny with
fatigue and wearing an expression of undaunted
sweetness and patience. Children and housework
and a selfish husband and nothing in life of her
own. She was at the disposal of everyone for kind
actions. She would be <em>really</em> sympathetic and
shocked about an earthquake in China. Was that
it? Was that being <em>inside</em>? Was that all there
was? The woman did not see the wonderful gold
brown light in the carriage; nor the beauty of the
blackness outside. In her brain was the pain and
pressure of everything she had to do. She was
good and sweet; perfectly good and sweet. But
there was something irritating about her ...
her obliviousness of everything but “troubles,”
other people’s as much as her own. Yet she
would love a day in the country. The fields and
the flowers would make her cry. It was her
obliviousness that made one afraid of associating
<a class="pagenum" title="120" id="page-120"/>
with her. Being in conversation with her or in
any way associated with her life there would
always be the dreadful imprisoned feeling of
knowing she did not <em>think</em>.... Her glance slid
over the other seated forms and fell, leaving her
struggling between her desire to feel in loving
union with them and her inability to ignore the
revelations pouring from their bearing and shapes,
their clothes and the way they held their belongings.
They were terrible and hateful because all
their thoughts were visible. The terrible maddening
thing about them was the thoughts they did
not think. It made them worse than the woman
because to get on with them one would have to
pretend to see life as they saw it. It would be so
easy and deceitful with each one alone, knowing
exactly what line to take. She wrenched herself
back to her prayer ... instantly the thought
came that all these people far away in themselves
wanted to be more loving. She drew herself
together and sat up staring out towards the darkness.
That was an answer again! A state of
mind that came from the state of prayer. But
then one would need always to be in a state of
prayer. It would be very difficult. It would be
almost impossible even to remember it in the
<a class="pagenum" title="121" id="page-121"/>
rush of life ... it would mean being a sort of
fool ... having no judgments or opinions.
It would <em>spoil</em> everything. There would be no
time for anything. Nothing beyond one’s daily
work and all the rest of the time being all things
to all men. It meant that now at this moment
one must give up the sense of the train going
along in the darkness and the sense of the dark
streets waiting lamplit under the dark sky and go
out to the people in the carriage and then on to
the people at Tansley Street ... she thought
of people she knew who did this, appearing to see
nothing in life but people, and recoiled. <em>Places</em>
to them were nothing but people; there was
something they missed out that could not be
given up. Something goes if you lose yourself in
humanity. You cannot find humanity by looking
for God only there. Making up your mind that
God is to be found in humanity is humanism....
It was Comte’s idea. Perhaps Unitarians are all
Comtists. That is why they dress without style.
They are more interested in social reform than
the astoundingness of there being people <em>anywhere</em>.
But to see God everywhere is pantheism.
What <em>is</em> Christianity? Where are Christians?
Evangelicals are humanitarians; rushing about
<a class="pagenum" title="122" id="page-122"/>
in ulsters. Anglicans know all about the beauty
of life and like comfort. But they are snobs and
afraid of new ideas ... convents and monasteries
stop your mind. But there is a God or a
Christ, there is something always there to answer
when you turn away to it from everything.
Perhaps one would have to remain silent, for
years, for a lifetime, and in the end begin to
understand.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-4-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
At Gower Street it was eleven o’clock. She
was faint with hunger. She had had no dinner
and there was nothing in her room. She wandered
along the Euston Road hoping to meet a potato-man.
The shopfronts were black. There was
nothing to meet her need but the empty stretch
of lamplit pavement leading on and on....
Rapid walking in the rain-freshened air relieved
her faintness but she dreaded waking in the night
with gnawing hunger to keep her awake and drag
her up exhausted in the morning. A faint square
of brighter light on the pavement ahead came
like an accusation. Passing swiftly across it she
glanced bitterly at the frosted door through
which it came. Restaurant. Donizetti Brothers.
<a class="pagenum" title="123" id="page-123"/>
The whole world had conspired to leave her alone
with that mystery shut in and hidden every day
the whole of her London time behind its closed
frosted doors and forcing her now to admit
that there was food there and she must go in or
have the knowledge of being starved through
fear. Her thoughts flashed painfully across a
frosted door long ago in Baker Street and she saw
the angry handsome face of the waiter who had
shouted roll and butter and whisked away from
the table the twisted cone of serviette and the
knives and forks. That was in the middle of the
day. It would be worse at night. Perhaps they
would even refuse to serve her. Perhaps it was
impossible to go into a restaurant late at night
alone. She was coming back. There was nothing
to be seen behind the steamy panes on either
side of the door but plants standing on oil cloth
mats. Behind them was again frosted glass. It
was not so grand as Baker Street. There was no
menu in a large brass frame with Schweppe’s at
the top. She pushed open the glass door and
was confronted by another glass door blankly
frosted all over. Why were they so secret?
Inside the second door she found herself at the
beginning of a long aisle of linoleum. On either
<a class="pagenum" title="124" id="page-124"/>
side people were dotted here and there on short
velvet sofa seats behind marble topped tables.
In the close air there was a strong smell made up
of all kinds of meat dishes. A waiter flicking
the crumbs from a table glanced sharply round
at her and went off down the room. He had seen
the shifts and miseries that haunted all her doings.
They were apparent in the very hang of her
cloak. She could not first swing down the
restaurant making it wave for joy as it did when
she walked across Trafalgar Square in the dark
and then order a roll and butter. After this it
would never wave for joy again. A short compact
bald man in a white apron was hurrying down the
aisle, towards <em>her</em>. He stopped just in front of
her and stood bowing and indicating a near empty
table with his short arm and stood silently hovering
while she dragged herself into place on the velvet
sofa. The waiter rushing up with a menu was
gently waved away and the little man stood over
the side of the table blocking out the fuller end
of the restaurant. Hardly able to speak for the
beating of her heart she looked up into a little
firm round pallid face with a small snub nose and
curious pale waxy blue eyes and said furiously
oh please just a roll and butter and a cup of cocoa.
<a class="pagenum" title="125" id="page-125"/>
The little man bowed low with a beaming face
and went gently away. Miriam watched him go
down the aisle bowing here and there right and
left. The hovering waiter came forward questioningly
to meet him and was again waved aside
and she presently saw the little man at a speaking
tube and heard him sing in a soft smooth high
monotone, un-sho-co-lat. He brought her things
and arranged them carefully about her and
brought her an Illustrated London News from
another table. She sipped and munched and
looked at all the pictures. The people in the
pictures were real people. She imagined them
moving and talking in all manner of circumstances
and suffered their characteristics gently,
feeling as if some one were there gently half-reproachfully
holding her hands tied behind her
back. The waiter roamed up and down the aisle.
People came in, sometimes two or three at a time.
The little man was sitting writing with a stern
bent face at a little table at the far end of the
restaurant just in front of a marble counter holding
huge urns and glass dishes piled with buns
and slices of cake. He did not move again until
she rose to go when he came once more hurrying
down the aisle. Her bill was sixpence and he
<a class="pagenum" title="126" id="page-126"/>
took the coin with a bow and waited while she
extricated herself from the clinging velvet, and
held the door wide for her to pass out. Good
evening thank you very much she murmured
hoping that he heard, in response to his polite
farewell. She wandered slowly home through the
drizzling rain warmed and fed and with a glow
at her heart. Inside those frightful frosted
doors was a home, a bit of her own London home.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-4-4">
4
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
The hall gas was out. The dining-room door
was ajar showing a faint light and light was
coming from the little room at the end of the
passage. Miriam cautiously pushed open the
dining-room door. Mrs. Bailey was sitting alone
poised socially in a low armchair by the fire with
the gas turned low. Miriam came dutifully
forward in response to the entrancement of her
smile and stood on the hearthrug enwrapped in
her evening, invaded by the sense of beginning it
anew with Mrs. Bailey. When had she seen Mrs.
Bailey last? She could tell her now about Eve
in great confidential detail and explain that she
could not <em>at present</em> afford to come to Tansley
<a class="pagenum" title="127" id="page-127"/>
Street. That would be a great sociable conversation
and the engagement with Mr. Bowdoin
would remain untouched. She stood in a glow of
eloquence. Mrs. Bailey preened and bridled and
made little cheerful affectionate remarks and
waited silent a moment before asking if it rained.
Miriam forgot Eve and gathered herself together
for some tremendous communication. Was it
raining? She glanced at the outside London
world and was lost in interchanging scenes, her
mind split up, pressing several ways at once.
Mrs. Bailey saw all these scenes and felt and
understood them exactly as she did. There was no
need to answer the question. She glanced stonily
towards her and saw the downcast held-in
embarrassment of her waiting form. In a dry
professional official voice she said gazing at the
hearthrug with an air of judicial profundity, <em>no</em>,
at least oh yes, I <em>think</em> it is raining and drifted
helplessly towards the window. The challenge
was behind her. She would have to face it again.
A borrowed voice said briskly within her yes
it’s pouring, I <em>hope</em> it will be fine to-morrow, what
<em>weather</em> we have had; well <em>good</em>night Mrs.
Bailey. I have been to a lecture she said in imagination
standing by the window. It was what any
<a class="pagenum" title="128" id="page-128"/>
other boarder would have said and then so fine,
such a splendid lecturer and told the subject and
his name and one idea out of the lecture and they
would have agreed and gone cheerfully to bed,
with no thoughts. To try and really tell anything
about the lecture would be to plunge down
into misrepresentations and misunderstandings
and end with the lecture vanished. To say anything
real about it would lead to living the rest
of her life with the Baileys helping them with
their plans ... she turned and came busily
back. It’s very late she murmured. Mrs. Bailey
smiled and yawned. At least not so very late, not
quite to-morrow she pursued turning round to
the clock and back again to consult the pictures
and the wall-paper. Just staying there was
answering Mrs. Bailey’s question. Suddenly she
laughed out and turned, laughing, as if she were
about to communicate some mirthful memory.
It’s too <em>absurd</em> she said distracted between the
joy of her lingering laughter and the need for
instantly inventing an explanation. Mrs. Bailey
was laughing delightedly. There was a most
absurd thing—chanted Miriam above her laughter;
a gentle tap took Mrs. Bailey scurrying to
the door. May I have a <em>candle</em> Mrs. Bailey
<a class="pagenum" title="129" id="page-129"/>
murmured a low voice in a curious solidly curving
intonation. Certainly doctor answered Mrs.
Bailey’s voice in the hall. She scurried away
downstairs. Miriam turned towards the window
and stood listening to St. Pancras clock striking
midnight. Then those men in the little back
sitting-room were <em>doctors</em>. How pleased and proud
Mrs. Bailey must be. How wonderful of her to
say nothing about them. Can I have a <em>candle</em>
missuz Bailey. Wrapped away in the suave strong
courteous voice were the knowledge and the
fineness of a world no one in the house knew
anything about. Mrs. Bailey dimly knew, and
screened it fearing to lose it. She had the
wonderful voice all to herself. “Good evening.”
The voice was in the <em>room</em>. Miriam turned
instantly; a square strong-looking man a little
over middle height with flat pale fair hair smooth
on a squarish head above grave bluntly moulded
features was moving easily forward from the door.
They met at the end of the table standing one
each side the angle of the fireside corner, smiling
as if her murmured response to his greeting had
been a speech in a play ready-made to bring them
together. Miriam felt that if she had said oh I’m
so glad he would have responded yes; so am I.
<a class="pagenum" title="130" id="page-130"/>
My name’s von Heber he announced quietly, his
restrained uncontrollably deepening smile sending
out a radiance all round her. It was as if they
had met before without the opportunity of
speaking and here at last was the opportunity
and they had first to smile out their recognition
of its perfection. They stood in a radiant silence,
his even tones making no break in their interchange.
She felt a quality in him she had not met
before; in the ease of his manner there was
no trace of the complacent assumption of the
man of the world. His deference was no mask
worn to decorate himself. It was deliberate and
yet genuine. It was the shape in which he presented
to her, personally, set above and away from
her ugly clothes and her weariness, the beam of
delight which had been his inward greeting. The
completeness and confidence of his delight, his
own completeness and security revealed to her an
unknown reading of life that she longed to hold
and fathom. She offered in return as a measure
of her qualification, the laughter she had laughed
to Mrs. Bailey, hoping he had heard it. I find
this custom of putting down the light at eleven
very inconvenient he was saying. Miriam smiled
and listened eagerly for more of the low even
<a class="pagenum" title="131" id="page-131"/>
curiously curving intonations. I propose to take
the London medical examination in July and I’ve
a good deal of hard work to get through prior to
that date. He had not been going to stop speaking
but Miriam found an immense welcoming space
for the word she summoned in vain desperately
from far away Wimpole Street. The <em>con</em>joint she
declared at last eagerly, almost before the word
reached her consciousness. The Conjoint he
repeated and as his voice went on Miriam contemplated
the accumulation they had gathered.
She stood smiling, growing familiar with the
quality of his voice, gathering the sense of a word
here and there. Through his talk he smiled a quizzical
pleased appreciation of this way of listening.
She felt as if they were talking backwards, towards
something already said and when she took in I’m
taking the post-graduate <em>course</em> at your great
hospital near here she tried in vain to resist the
temptation of leading his talk down into detail.
The way to preserve the charm unbroken would
be to let him go on talking. She might even listen
carefully, and learn the meaning of the post-graduate
course and its place in the London
medical world; the whole of the London medical
world was being transformed by this man into
<a class="pagenum" title="132" id="page-132"/>
something simple and joyful. But the eager
words had escaped her—oh; that’s the one
with the glorious yarn. Tell me the yarn he
chuckled gently, showing a row of strong squarish
flawless teeth. Well, she said the big surgeons
were operating and the patient was collapsing
and one said I think it is time we called in Divine
aid. Nonsense said the other I don’t believe in
unqualified assistants. That’s great he declared;
that’s one of the greatest yarns I’ve heard. I
shan’t forget it. He was not shocked and she had
told the story as evenly and as much without
emphasis as he would have done himself. She
suddenly realised that this was the way to say
things. It made no pause and did not disturb
anything. She was learning from him every
moment. He was <em>utterly</em> different to the men
she knew. He did not resent her possession of
the story nor attempt to cap it. You’ve got some
very great men over here he said; some of the
very greatest; and he began outlining the
Canadian reputation of names that were amongst
the pinnacles of Wimpole Street conversation.
She learned exactly why Victor Horsley was
great in the world and what it was that
Dr. Barker did to fractured knee-caps. When
<a class="pagenum" title="133" id="page-133"/>
Mrs. Bailey came up it was half-past twelve.
He accepted his candle and thanked her gravely
and gravely took his leave. Miriam and Mrs.
Bailey were left confronted. Miriam laughed a
social laugh, unintentionally, and listened happily
to Mrs. Bailey’s kind brisk echo of it as she stood
turning out the gas. They turned to each other
in the hall and laughed goodnight. Mrs. Bailey
was like a happy excited girl. She trotted busily
and socially downstairs humming a tune towards
a sociable waiting world, flouting difficulties with
the sweep of the laughter in her voice.
</p>
<p>
Your Barker and your Horsley mused Miriam
slackening her speed on the stairs; the sound of
the low quiet glad confident voice steadying the
aspect of the world and a strange new sense of
the London medical world dotted by men who
were world-famous, approached from afar, reverently,
for specialist training, by already qualified
medical men, competed together within her as
she prepared for bed, going serenely through
all the tiresome little processes. Something in
the centre of life had steadied and clarified. It
sent a radiance like sunlight through the endless
processes of things; even a ragged tooth-brush
was a part of the sunlit scene; not unnoticed, or
just dismal, but a part of the sunlit scene.
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-5">
<a class="pagenum" title="134" id="page-134"/>
CHAPTER V
</h2>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">S</span><span class="postfirstchar">till</span> 
talking, Mr. Bowdoin went up the
rubbish-strewn steps and opened the dusty
blistered door with his latchkey. Miriam followed
him into a dark bare passage and down
carpetless stairs into a large chilly twilit basement
room. Nothing was visible but a long kitchen
table lit by a low barred window at the far end
of the room. I will light a lamp for you in a
moment he murmured in his formal cockney
monotone; my friends will be arriving soon and
before they come I should like to show you my
sketches. Miriam sat down silently. The feeling
of the neighbourhood was in the room. A heavy
blankness lay over everything. She felt nowhere.
It had been difficult to take part in conversation
walking along the Farringdon Road. It was
strange enough to know that anyone lived in a
road almost in the city; and paying a visit there
was like stepping out of the world.
</p>
<p>
With his slow even speech Mr. Bowdoin
<a class="pagenum" title="135" id="page-135"/>
rebuked her here even more strongly for her outbreak
of excited talk and loud laughter about
Devonshire. He had not felt that they were
walking along, outside London, in blank space,
free, and exactly alike in their thoughts. He
had not had that moment when they turned
into the strange dead road <em>east</em> of Bloomsbury,
nowhere, and he had seemed like herself at her
side and he ought to have laughed and laughed.
His sudden searching look, are you mad or intoxicated,
with your sudden Billingsgate manners,
had said that Farringdon Road was in the world
and that he intended to conduct himself in the
usual manner of a gentleman escorting a lady.
As he lit a little lamp on the corner of the table
she glanced at the back of his hair and imagined
him sitting at a typewriter with it in curl-papers,
and determined to be at ease. What a jolly room
she exclaimed with strained animation as the
lamplight wavered up and then sat looking at her
hands. It would be cruel to look about the
room. She had seen kitchen chairs standing
sparsely about in the spaces unoccupied by the
table, a cottage piano standing at right angles
with the low window and one picture over the
piano. There was nothing else in the room. The
<a class="pagenum" title="136" id="page-136"/>
floor was covered with strips of coarse worn oil-cloth
and there was nothing above the empty
mantelpiece. It is quite bohemian said Mr.
Bowdoin lighting the piano candles. Let me
take your cloak. Miriam slipped off her golf-cape
and he disappeared between curtains at the end
of the room opposite the window.
</p>
<p>
This was Bohemia! She glanced about. It was
the explanation of the room. But it was impossible
to imagine Trilby’s milk-call sounding at the
door.... It was Bohemia; the table and
chairs were <em>bohemian</em>. Perhaps a big room like
this would be even cheaper than a garret in St.
Pancras. The neighbourhood did not matter.
A bohemian room could hold its own anywhere.
No furniture but chairs and a table, saying when
you brought people in I am a Bohemian and having
no one but Bohemians for friends. There
must be a special way of behaving in English
Bohemia. Perhaps when the friends came she
would find it out. I have the sketches in a drawer
here said Mr. Bowdoin coming back through the
curtains and turning up an end of the table-cloth....
Ah! C’est le pied de Trilby.
Wee. D’après nature? Nong. De mémoire,
alors? ... où rien ne troublera, Trilby,
<a class="pagenum" title="137" id="page-137"/>
qui dorrr-mira, thought Miriam. She took
the little water-colour sketches one by one and
listened carefully to Mr. Bowdoin’s descriptions
of the subjects, trying to think of something to
say. It was wonderful that he should take so
much trouble on a holiday. The words in his
descriptions brought Devonshire scenes alive
into her mind, and she could imagine how he felt
as he looked at them ... <em>plats d’épinards</em>
... it was like the difference between the
French and English Bohemia. But the true
thing in it was that he had wanted to do them.
That gave him his right to call himself a Bohemian.
He would have tried to write if he wanted
to and have gone to live in a garret in Fleet Street.
Why don’t you put them about the room she
asked insincerely. It was false and cruel; a
criticism of the room which was beginning to
show its real character; not interfering; plain
and clear for things to happen and shine out in
it in their full strength. And it was a flattery of
the pictures which were nothing. Well, they’re
just beginnings. Hardly worthy of exhibition.
I hope to attain to something better in the future.
Where did he find all his calm words and self-confidence.
Perhaps it was the result of having a
<a class="pagenum" title="138" id="page-138"/>
room to invite friends to and talk about things in.
But how could anybody do anything with people
coming and going, confusing everything by
perpetually <em>saying</em> things? She stared obediently
at sketch after sketch until her eyes ached. It was
going on too long. Her strength was ebbing out
and the evening was still to come. He liked
showing his sketches and thought she was entertained.
Even in Bohemia people thought it was
necessary to always be doing some definite thing.
There was a knocking at the front door upstairs.
Mr. Bowdoin went quickly up and came down
with a tall lady. He introduced her and she
bowed and at once took off her outdoor things.
While he was putting them away behind the
curtains she sat briskly down on a chair at the
far end of the room in a line with Miriam and
arranged her hair and her dress with easy unconcerned
movements. She did not look in the
least bohemian. She sat drawn up in her chair
very tall and thin in a clumsy dress with a high
stiff collarband. Her head and hair above her
thin dingy neck were—common. Undoubtedly.
She looked like a post-office young lady. She was
quite old, twenty-seven or twenty-eight. While
the other people came in she sat very still and
<a class="pagenum" title="139" id="page-139"/>
self-possessed, as if nothing were happening. Was
that dignity? Not attempting to hide your
peculiarities and defects, but just keeping perfectly
still and calm whatever happened? There
were two men and another woman. They stood
about in the gloom near the door while Mr.
Bowdoin carried away their things and came
back and murmured Miss Rogers and Miss
Henderson, and then sat down in a row on the
kitchen chairs in line near the piano. Their faces
were above the reach of the lamplight. Their
bodies had the subdued manner of the less
important sitters in a parish church. Mr. Bowdoin
was putting the little lamp on the top of
the piano. The light ran up the wall. The
picture was a large portrait of Paderewski. It
was amongst Miriam’s records of Queen’s Hall
posters, coming and going amongst other posters
of musicians, passed by with a hurried glance,
soon obliterated by the oncoming of the blazing
flower-baskets as she hurried down Langham
Place sore with her effort to forget the reminders
of music beyond her reach. Looking at it now
she felt as if all she had missed were suddenly
brought to her; her sense of thwarting and loss
was swept away. She sat up relieved, bathed in
<a class="pagenum" title="140" id="page-140"/>
sunshine. The room was full of life and warmth
and golden light. She eagerly searched the
features until Mr. Bowdoin took the lamp off the
piano and sat down murmuring I will give you
a sonata of Bytoven. The outline of the face
shone down through the gloom. She could recall
each feature in perfect distinctness. All the soft
weakness of the musical temperament was there,
the thing that made people call musicians a soft
weak lot. But there was something else; perhaps
it was in all musicians who were such great
executors as to be almost composers. The curious
conscious half-pleading sensitive weakness of the
mouth and chin were dreadful; a sort of nakedness
as if a whole weak nature were escaping there
for everyone to see; and then suddenly reined
in; held in and back by the pose of the reined-in
head. The great aureole of fluffy hair was shaped
and held in shape by the same power. The whole
head, soft and weak in all its details, was resolute
and strong.... If the face were raised to
look outwards it would be weak, pained and
suffering and almost querulously sorrowful; but
in its own right pose it was happy and strong.
The pose of the head gave it its grip on the features
and the hair and made <em>beauty</em>. The pose of
<a class="pagenum" title="141" id="page-141"/>
<em>listening</em>. The eyes saw nothing. The reined-in
face was listening, intently, from a burning bush....
There was some reason not yet understood
why musicians and artists wore long hair.
</p>
<p>
The long sonata came to an end while Miriam
was still revolving amongst her thoughts. When
Mr. Bowdoin sat back from the piano she returned
to the point where she had begun and determined
to stop her halting circular progress from group
to group of interesting reflections and to listen
to the next thing he might play. She was aware
he was playing on his own piano better than he
had done at Tansley Street but also more carefully
and less self-forgetfully. Perhaps that was why
she had not listened. She could not remember
ever before having thoughts, about definite
things while music was going on, and felt afraid
lest she was ceasing to care for music. She found
it would be quite easy to speak coolly, with an
assumption of great appreciation and ask him to
play some definite thing. Just as she was about to
break into the silence with a remark, one of the
big curtains was suddenly drawn aside by a little
old lady bearing a tray of steaming cups. She
stood just inside the curtains, her delicate white-haired
lace-capped head bowing from side to
<a class="pagenum" title="142" id="page-142"/>
side of the room graciously, a gentle keen smile on
her delicately shrivelled face. My mother,
murmured Mr. Bowdoin as he went down the
room for the tray. Slender and short as he was,
she was invisible behind him as he bent for the
tray and when he turned with it to the room she
had disappeared. Miriam gazed at the dark
curtains hoping for her return and dreading it.
Nothing suitable to an enthusiastic bohemian
evening could be said in a courtly manner....
She accepted a cup of coffee without a word as if
Mr. Bowdoin had been a waiter, and sat flaring
over it. She felt as if nothing could be said until
there had been some reference to the vision. She
hoped everyone had bowed and remembered with
shame that she had only stared. Everyone
seemed to be stirring; but the beginnings of
speech went forward as if the little old lady had
never appeared. Mr. Bowdoin had sat down with
the men on the other side of the room and the
woman had crossed over to a chair near Miss
Rogers and was in eager conversation with her.
Miss Rogers has only lately joined musical circles
she heard Mr. Bowdoin say in an affectionate
indulgent tone. That accounted for the way
she deferred to him and sat in a sort of complacent
<a class="pagenum" title="143" id="page-143"/>
exclusive rapture, keeping her manner unchanged
before the onslaught of the eagerly talking woman.
The woman was in the circle and did not seem to
think it strange that Miss Rogers should be a
candidate. She was talking about some orchestra
somewhere ... of something she wanted to
play, <em>he</em> conducting, she finished in a tone of
worship. Her voice was refined and she talked
easily, but she also had the common uneducated
look ... and she was talking about Camberwell.
Mr. Bowdoin was a conductor of an
orchestra. Those people played in orchestras, or
wanted to. The three men were talking in eager
happy sentences and laughing happily and not
noisily. There was something here that was
lacking in Miss Szigmondy’s prosperous musical
people, something that kept them apart from the
world where they made their living.... They
worked hard in two worlds ... when Mr.
Bowdoin was at the piano again they all sat easy
and at home, in easy attitudes, affectionately
listening. The room seemed somehow less dark
and their forms much more visible and bigger.
The empty white coffee cups standing about on
the table caught the light. Miriam’s stood alone
at the end of the table. Mr. Bowdoin had taken
<a class="pagenum" title="144" id="page-144"/>
it from her but without entering into conversation
and she was left with her prepared remark
about the piano and her plea for a performance of
the Tannhäuser overture going unsaid round
and round in her mind. She sat ashamed before
the restrained impersonal enthusiasm that filled
the room. Even Miss Rogers was sitting less
stiffly. Her own stiffness must make it obvious
that she was not in a musical circle. Musical
circles had a worldly savoir-faire of their own,
the thing that was to be found everywhere in the
world. To be in one would mean having to talk
like that eager worshipping woman or to be calm
and easily supercilious and secret like Miss Rogers.
Even here the men were apart from the women;
to join the men would be easy enough, to say
exactly what one thought and talk about all sorts
of things and laugh. But the women would hate
that and one would have to be intimate with the
women, and rave about music and musicians. Mr.
Bowdoin had probably thought she would talk
to those women. But after talking to them how
could one listen to music? Their very presence
made it almost impossible. She was unable to
lose herself in the Wagner overture. It sounded
out thinly into the room. Paderewski was looking
<a class="pagenum" title="145" id="page-145"/>
away to where there was nothing but music
sounding in a wooden room just inside an immense
forest somewhere in Europe. She began thinking
secretly of the world waiting for her outside
and felt that she was affronting everyone in the
room; treacherously and not visibly as before.
She had got away from them but they did not
know it. Mr. Bowdoin passed from the overture
which was vociferously applauded and went on
and on till she ceased altogether to try to listen
and he became a stranger, sitting there playing
seriously and laboriously alone at his piano....
She wished he would play a waltz—and she
suddenly blushed to find herself sitting there at
all....
</p>
<p>
They all seemed to get up to go at the same
moment and when they drifted out into the
street seemed all to be going the same way.
Miriam found herself walking along the Farringdon
Road between Mr. Bowdoin and the shorter
of the two other men, longing for solitude and
to be free to wander slowly along the new addition
to her map of London at night. Even with
Bohemians evenings did not end when they
ended, but led to the forced companionship of
walking home. The tall man and the two women
<a class="pagenum" title="146" id="page-146"/>
were marching along ahead at a tremendous
pace and she was obliged to hasten her steps to
keep up with her companions’ evident intention
of keeping them in view. Perhaps at the top of
the road they would all separate. We will escort
Miss Henderson to her home and then I’ll come
on with you to Highgate. To <em>High</em>gate—exclaimed
Miriam almost stopping. Are you going
to walk to Highgate <em>to-night</em>? They both laughed.
Oh yes said Mr. Bowdoin that’s nothing. <em>Highgate.</em>
The mere thought of its northern remoteness
seemed to be an insult to London. No
wonder she had found herself a stranger with
these people. Walking out to Highgate at night
and getting up as usual the next morning. Magnificent
strong hard thing to do. Horrible. Walking
out to Highgate, “talking all the time” ...
they could never have a minute to realise anything
at all; rushing along saying things that
covered everything and never stopping to realise,
talking <em>about</em> people and things and never being
or knowing anything, and perpetually coming to
the blank emptiness of <em>Highgate</em> ... their
unconsciousness of everything made them the
right sort of people to have the trouble of living
in Highgate. They probably walked about with
<a class="pagenum" title="147" id="page-147"/>
knapsacks on Sunday. But to them even the
real country could not be country. All ‘circles’
must be like that in some way; doing things
by agreement. The men talking confidently
about them, <em>completely</em> ignorant of any sort of
reality.... She came out of her musings
when they turned into the Euston Road and
ironically watched the men keeping up their
talk across the continual breaking up of the
group by passing pedestrians. <em>You’ll</em> have to
walk <em>back</em> she interrupted, suddenly turning to
Mr. Bowdoin; the buses will have stopped. I
never ride in omnibuses frowned Mr. Bowdoin. I
shall be back by two.... Miriam waited a
moment inside the door at Tansley Street listening
for silence. The evening fell away from her with
the departing footsteps of the two men. She
opened the door upon the high quiet empty
blue-lit street and moved out into a tranquil
immensity. It was everywhere. Into her consciousness
of the unpredictable incidents of to-morrow’s
Wimpole Street day, over the sure
excitement of Eve’s arrival in the evening flowed
the light-footed leaping sense of a day new begun,
an inexhaustible blissfulness, everything melted
away into it. It seemed to smite her, calling for
<a class="pagenum" title="148" id="page-148"/>
some spoken acknowledgment of its presence,
alive and real in the heart of the London darkness.
It was not her fault that Eve was not coming to
stay at Tansley Street. It came out of the way
life arranged itself as long as you did not try to
interfere. Roaming along in the twilight she
lost consciousness of everything but the passage
of dark silent buildings, the drawing away under
her feet of the varying flags of the pavement, the
waxing and waning along the pavement of the
streams of lamplight, the distant murmuring tide
of sound passing through her from wide thoroughfares,
the gradual approach of a thoroughfare,
the rising of the murmuring tide to a happy
symphony of recognisable noises, the sudden
glare of yellow shop-light under her feet, the
wide black road, the joy of the need for the
understanding sweeping glance from right to
left as she moved across it, the sense of being
swept across in an easy curve drawn by the kindly
calculable swing of the traffic, of being a permitted
co-operating part of the traffic, the coming
of the friendly curb and the strip of yellow pavement,
carrying her on again into the lamplit
greyness leading along to Donizetti’s.
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-6">
<a class="pagenum" title="149" id="page-149"/>
CHAPTER VI
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> came forward seeing nothing but
the golden gaslight pouring over the
white table-cloth. She sat down near Mrs.
Bailey within the edge of its radiance. The
depths of the light still held unchanged the
welcome that had been there when she had come
in and found Emile laying the table. There was
no change and no disappointment. The smeary
mirrors and unpolished furniture were bright in
the gaslight, showing distances of interior and
gleaming passages of light. In the spaces between
the pictures the walls sent back sheeny reflections
of the glow on the table. People coming in one
by one saying good evening in different intonations
and sitting down sending out waves of enquiry,
left her undisturbed. There were five or six
forms about the table besides Sissie sitting at the
far end opposite her mother. They made sudden
statements about the weather one after the other.
<a class="pagenum" title="150" id="page-150"/>
They were waiting to have their daily experience
of the meal changed by something she might do
or say. Emile was handing round plates of soup.
Presently they would all be talking and would
have forgotten her. Then she could see them all
one by one and get away unseen, having had
dinner only with Mrs. Bailey. Mrs. Bailey was
standing up carving the joint. When the sounds
she made were all that was to be heard, she
responded to the last remark about the weather
or asked some fresh question about it as if no one
had spoken at all. When she was not speaking
every movement of her battle with the joint
expressed her triumphant affectionate sense of
Miriam’s presence. She had made no introductions.
She was saying secretly there you are
young lady. I told you so. Now you’re in your
right place. It’s quite easy you see. The joint
was already partly distributed. Emile was handing
<em>three</em> piled dishes of vegetables. A generous
plateful of well-browned meat and gravy appeared
before Miriam with Mrs. Bailey’s strong small
toil-disfigured hand firmly grasping its edge. She
took it to pass it on. Everything was hurrying
on.... That’s yorce my child said Mrs. Bailey.
The low murmur was audible round the silent
<a class="pagenum" title="151" id="page-151"/>
table. Asserting her independence with a sullen
formality Miriam thanked her and looked about
for condiments without raising her eyes to the
range of those other eyes, all taking photographs
now that she was forced into movements. Mrs.
Bailey placed a cruet near her plate. Yorce she
pondered getting angrily away into thought.
Mrs. Bailey <em>could</em> not know that it might be said
to be more correct than yourz. It was an affectation.
She had picked it up somewhere from one
of those people who carefully say off-ten instead of
awfen and it gave her satisfaction to use it, linked
rebukingly up with the complacent motherly
patronage of which she had boasted to the whole
table. The first of Emile’s dishes appeared over
her left shoulder and she saw as she turned unprepared,
raised heads turned towards her end
of the table. She scooped her vegetables quickly
and clumsily out of the dishes. In her awkward
movements and her unprotected raised face she
felt, and felt all the observers seeing, the marks of
her disgrace. They saw her looking like Eve
nervously helping herself to vegetables in the
horrible stony cold dark restaurant of the hostel.
They saw that she resented Mrs. Bailey’s public
familiarity and could do nothing. She tried to
<a class="pagenum" title="152" id="page-152"/>
look bored and murmured thank you when she
had taken her third vegetable. It sounded
out like a proclamation in the intense silence and
she turned angrily to her plate trying to remember
whether she had heard anyone else thank Emile
for vegetables.... After all she was paying
for the meal and her politeness to Emile was her
own affair. Abroad people bowed or raised their
hats going in and out of shops and said Monsieur
to policemen. Her efforts to eat abstractedly and
to appear plunged in thought made her feel more
and more like a poor relation. The details of
her meeting with Eve kept appearing in and out
of her attempt to get back her sense of Mrs.
Bailey’s house as a secret warmth and brightness
added to the many resources of her life. Mrs.
Bailey knew that her house had been transformed
by the meeting with Eve and was trying to tell
her that she was not as independent as she
thought.
</p>
<p>
What were the exact things she had told Mrs.
Bailey? She had talked excitedly and scrappily
and all the time Mrs. Bailey had been gathering
information and drawing her own conclusions
about the Hendersons. Mrs. Bailey saw Eve’s
arrival at the station and her weary resentment of
<a class="pagenum" title="153" id="page-153"/>
having everything done for her in the London
manner, her revenge in the cab, sitting back and
making the little abstracted patronising sounds
in response to everything that was said to her,
taking no interest, and at last saying <em>how</em> you run
on. She saw something of the hostel....
</p>
<p>
Where’s Mr. Mendizzable? demanded Sissie....
The Girls’ Friendly; that was the name
of that other thing. But that was for servants.
The Young Women’s Bible Association was the
worst disgrace that could happen to a gentlewoman....
Eve had liked it. She had suddenly
begun going about with an interested revived face
eagerly doing what she was told. She was there
now, it was her only home, and she must have all
her meals there for cheapness; there would be no
outside life for her. Her life was imprisoned by
those women, consciously goody conscientious
servants with flat caps, dominating everything,
revelling in the goody atmosphere; the young
women in the sitting-room all looking <em>raw</em>, as if
they washed very early in the morning in cold
water and did their shabby hair with cold hands;
the superintendent, the watchful official expression
on her large well-fed elderly high-school-girl
face, the <em>way</em> she sat on a footstool with her arms
<a class="pagenum" title="154" id="page-154"/>
round her knees pretending to be easy and jolly
while she recited that it was a privilege and a joy
for sisters to be so near to each other ...
as if she were daring us to deny it. I shan’t see
very much of Eve. She won’t want me to. She
will strike up a friendship with one of those young
women.... Miriam found herself glancing up
the table towards the centre of a conflict. They
were all joined in conflict over some common
theme. No one was outside it; the whole
table was in an uproar of voices and laughter....
It was nothing but Miss Scott saying things about
Mr. Mendizabal and everyone watching and
throwing in remarks.... Miss Scott was neighing
across the table at something that had been
said and was preparing to speak again without
breaking into her laughter. All faces were turned
her way. “What’s that Mr. Joe-anzen says?”
laughed Mrs. Bailey towards the last speaker.
The invisible man opposite Miss Scott was not
even Mr. Helsing; only the younger fainter
Norwegian, and this side of him an <em>extraordinary</em>
person ... an abruptly bulging coarse fringe,
a coarse-grained cheek bulging from under an
almost invisible deep-sunken eye, and abruptly
shelving bust under a coarse serge bodice.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="155" id="page-155"/>
“Mr. Yo-hanson says Mr. Mendy-zahble like
n-gaiety.” Miriam glanced across the table.
That was <em>all</em>. That little man with an adenoid
voice and a narrow sniggering laugh that brought
a flush and red spots all over his face, and shiny
straight Sunday school hair watered and brushed
flat, made up the party. Next to him was only
Polly. Then came Miss Scott on Sissie’s left;
then Sissie and round the corner the Norwegian.
Everyone looked dreadful in the harsh light,
secret and secretly hostile to everyone else,
unwilling to be there; and even here though
there was nothing and no one there was that
everlasting conversational fussing and competition.
</p>
<p>
“Quite right,” hooted the bulky woman in a
high pure girlish voice, “I doan blame ’im.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam turned towards the unexpectedness of
her voice and sat helplessly observing. The serge
sleeves were too short to cover her heavy red
wrists; her pudgy hands held her knife and fork
broadside, like salad servers. Her hair was combed
flatly up over her large skull and twisted into a
tiny screw at the top just behind the bulge of her
fringe. Could she possibly be a boarder? She
looked of far less consequence even than the
<a class="pagenum" title="156" id="page-156"/>
Baileys. Her whole person was unconsciously
ill at ease, making one feel ashamed.
</p>
<p>
“Mrs. m-Barrow is another of ’em,” said the
little man with his eyebrows raised as he sniggered
out the words.
</p>
<p>
“I <em>am</em> Mr. Gunna, I doan believe in go-an
abate with a face like a fiddle.”
</p>
<p>
Mr. Gunner’s laughter flung back his head and
sat him upright and brought him back to lean
over his plate shaking noiselessly with his head
sunk sideways between his raised shoulders as if
he were dodging a blow. The eyes he turned
maliciously towards Mrs. <a id="corr-30"/>Barrow were a hard
opaque pale blue. His lips turned outwards as
he ate and his knife and fork had an upward tilt
when at rest. Some of his spots were along the
margin of his lips, altering their shape and making
them look angry and sore. The eating part of his
face was sullen and angry, not touched by the
laughter that drew his eyebrows up and wrinkled
his bent forehead and sounded only as a little
click in his throat at each breath.
</p>
<p>
“There’s plenty of glum folks abate,” scolded
Mrs. Barrow.
</p>
<p>
Miriam was aware that she was recoiling visibly,
and tried to fix her attention on her meal. Mrs.
<a class="pagenum" title="157" id="page-157"/>
Bailey was carving large second helpings and
Emile’s vegetable dishes had been refilled. None
of these people thought it extraordinary that
there should be all this good meal and a waiter,
every day ... it would be shameful to come
again for the sake of the meal, feeling hostile.
Besides, it would soon be unendurable; they
would be aware of criticisms and would resent
them. The only way to be able to come would be
to pretend to laugh at remarks about people and
join in discussions on opinions about cheerfulness
and seriousness and winter and summer. They
would not know that one was not sincere. They
were perfectly sincere in their laughter and talk.
They all had some sort of common understanding,
even when they disagreed. It was the same everlasting
problem again, the way people took everything
for granted. They would be pleased,
would turn and like one if one could say heartily
<em>isn’t</em> he a funny little man, mts, my <em>word</em>, or 
well I
don’t see anything particularly funny about him,
or <em>oh</em>, give me the <em>summer</em>. But if one did that
one would presently be worn and strained with
lying, left with an empty excitement, while they
went serenely on their way, and the reality that
was there when one first sat down with them
<a class="pagenum" title="158" id="page-158"/>
would have gone. Always and always in the end
there was nothing but to be alone. And yet it
needed people in the world to make the reality
when one was alone. Perhaps just these uninterfering
people, when one had forgotten their
personal peculiarities and had only the consciousness
of them in the distance.... One
might perhaps then wonder sometimes longingly
what they were saying about the weather. But
to be <em>obliged</em> to meet them daily.... She chided
herself for the scathing glance she threw at the
unconscious guests. Gunner was smiling sideways
down the table again prepared to execute
his laugh when he should have caught an eye
and sent his grin home. Miriam almost prayed
that nothing should provoke him again to speech.
During a short silence she cleared her throat
elaborately to cover the sound of his eating.
Several voices broke out together, but Mrs.
Bailey was suddenly saying something privately
to her. She raised her head towards the bright
promise and was aware of Mr. Gunner thoughtful
and serene. There was a pleasant intelligence
somewhere about his forehead. If only she could
think his head clear and cool and not have to hear
again the hot dull hollow resonance of his voice
<a class="pagenum" title="159" id="page-159"/>
how joyfully she would be listening to Mrs.
Bailey. I’ve got a very special message for you
young lady she had said and now went on with her
eye on the conflict at the end of the table into
which Mr. Gunner was throwing comments and
exclamations from afar. The room beamed softly
in its golden light. From the heart of the golden
light Mrs. Bailey was hurrying towards her with
good tidings.
</p>
<p>
“<em>Hah.</em>”...
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Bailey looked round cloaking her vexation
in a bridling smile as Mr. Mendizabal came in
sturdily beaming. He sat down amidst the general
outcry and Emile busied himself to lay him a
place. He shouted answers to everyone, sitting
with his elbows on the table. Putting her elbows
on the table Mrs. Bailey applauded with little
outbursts of laughter. She had dropped the
idea of delivering her message. Miriam finished
her pudding hurriedly. The din was increasing.
No one was aware of her. Cautiously rising she
asked Mrs. Bailey to excuse her. You go Miss?
shouted Mr. Mendizabal suddenly looking her
way. He looked extraordinary, not himself.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-2">
<a class="pagenum" title="160" id="page-160"/>
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Eve’s shop was a west-end blaze of flowers.
The window was blocked with flowers in jars,
tied up in large bundles. In front were gilt
baskets of hot-house flowers. Propped in the
middle were a large flower anchor and a flower
horseshoe, both trimmed with large bows of white
satin ribbon—women in white satin evening
dresses with trains, bowing from platforms—on
either side were tight dance buttonholes pinned
on to heart-shaped velvet mounts.
</p>
<p>
It was strange to be able to go in.... Going
in to see an employee was not the right way to
go into a west-end shop.... There <em>was</em>
Eve; standing badly in a droopy black dress on a
bare wet wooden floor. Cut flowers in stone jam
pots, masses of greenery lying on a wet table.
Hulloh aren’t your <em>feet</em> wet demanded Miriam
irritably. Eve started and turned, looking. She
was exhausted and excited, grappling dreamily
with abrupt instructions with a conservatory
smell competing with them; trying to become
part of a clever arrangement to collect the conservatory
smell for sale. She stepped slenderly
forward; all her old Eve manner, but determined
<a class="pagenum" title="161" id="page-161"/>
to guard against disturbance; making sounds
without speaking, and the faint shape of a tired
smile. She was worn out with the fatigue of
trying to make herself into something else, but
<a id="corr-32"/>liking it and determined not to be reminded of
other things. Even her hair seemed to be changed.
Full of pictures of Eve, gracefully dressed and
with piled brown hair Miriam’s eyes passed in
fury over the skimpy untidy sham shop-assistant,
beginning a failure defensively, <em>imagining</em> behind
it that she was taking hold of London....
Won’t you catch <em>cold</em>? You get used to it
mouthed Eve nervously turning her head away
and waiting, fumbling a scattered spray of
smilax. Eve had always loved smilax. Did it
seem the same to her now? Fancy <em>you</em> said
Miriam, in all this damp. They were both
miserable and Eve was not going to put it right.
All her strength and interest was for this new
thing. Do you like it? said Miriam beginning
again. Yes awfully flushed Eve looking as if she
were going to cry. It was too late. I suppose its
awfully interesting asked Miriam formally, opening
a conversation with a stranger. Mps said Eve
warmly I simply love it. It makes you frightfully
tired at first, but I find I can do things I never
<a class="pagenum" title="162" id="page-162"/>
dreamed I could. I don’t <em>mind</em> standing in the
wet a bit now. You have to if you’re obliged to.
Eve was <em>liking</em> hardness imposed by other people.
<em>Liking</em> the prices of her new life. Accepting them
without resentment. People would despise and
like her for that. Perhaps she would succeed in
staying on if her strength did not give way. Her
graceful dresses and leisurely brown hair going
further and further away.... Do you <em>serve</em>?
Ssh. I’m learning to. Eve would not look, and
wanted her to be gone. I’m free for lunch said
Miriam snappily, holding to the disappearing
glory of her first coming out into London in the
middle of a week-day. Eve should have guessed
and stopped being anything but Eve being taken
out to lunch. We could go to an A.B.C. Oh I
can’t come <em>out</em> murmured Eve ignoringly.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam ordered another cup of coffee and went
on reading. There was plenty of time. Eve
would not appear at Tansley Street until half-past.
In looking up at the clock she had become
aware of detailed people grouped at tables. She
plunged back into Norway, reading on and on.
<a class="pagenum" title="163" id="page-163"/>
Each line was wonderful; but all in a darkness.
Presently on some turned page something would
shine out and make a meaning. It went on and
on. It seemed to be going towards something.
But there was nothing that <em>anyone</em> could imagine,
nothing in life or in the world that could make it
clear from the beginning, or bring it to an end.
If the man died the author might stop. Finis.
But it would not make any difference to anything.
She turned the pages backwards re-reading passages
here and there. She could not remember
having read them. Looking forward to portions
of the dialogue towards the end of the book she
found them familiar; as if she had read them
before ... she read them intently. They
had more meaning read like that, without knowing
to what they were supposed to refer. They were
the <em>same</em>, read alone in scraps, as the early parts.
It was all one book in some way, not through the
thoughts, or the story, but something in the
author. People who talked about the book
probably understood the strange thoughts and
the puzzling hinting story that began and came
to an end and left everything as it was before.
The author did not seem to suggest that you
should be sorry. He seemed to know that at the
<a class="pagenum" title="164" id="page-164"/>
end everything was as before, with the mountains
all round.... The electric lights flashed out
all over the A.B.C. at once.... Miriam
remained bent low over her book. Only you had
been in Norway, in a cottage up amongst the
mountains and out in the open. She read a scene
at random and another and began again and read
the first scene through and then the last. It was
all the <em>same</em>. You might as well begin at the
end.... In <em>Norway</em>, up among the misty
mountains, in farms and cottages looking down on
fiords with glorious scenery about them all
the time are people, sitting in the winter by fires
and worrying about right and wrong. They
<em>wonder</em> but more gravely and clearly than we do.
Torrents thunder in their ears and they can see
mountains all the time even when they are indoors.
“Ibsen’s Brand” is about all those
worrying things, in magnificent scenery. You
are <em>in</em> Norway while you read. That is why
people read books by geniuses and look far-away
when they talk about them. They know they
have been somewhere you cannot go without
reading the book.... <em>Brand</em>. You are in
the strangeness of Norway—and then there are
people saying things that might be said anywhere.
<a class="pagenum" title="165" id="page-165"/>
But with something going in and out of the words
all the time. Ibsen’s genius. You can’t understand
it or see where it is. Each sentence looks so
ordinary, making you wonder what it is all about.
But taking you somewhere, to stay, forgetting
everything, until it is finished. An hour ago
Ibsen was just a name people said in a particular
way, a difficult wonderful mystery, and <em>improper</em>.
Why do people say he is improper? He is exactly
like everyone else, thinking and worrying about
the same things. But putting them down in a
background that is more real than people or
thoughts. The life in the background is in the
people. He does not know this. Why did he
write it? A book by a genius is alive. That is
why “Ibsen” is superior to novels; because it is
not quite about the people or the thoughts.
There is something else; a sort of lively freshness
all over even the saddest parts, preventing your
feeling sorry for the people. Everyone ought to
know. It ought to be on the omnibuses and in
the menu. All these people fussing about not
knowing of Ibsen’s Brand. A volume, bound in a
cover. Alive. Precious. What <em>is</em> Genius? Something
that can take you into Norway in an
A.B.C.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="166" id="page-166"/>
She wandered out into Oxford Street. There
was a vast fresh gold-lit sky somewhere behind
the twilight. Why did Ibsen sit down in Norway
and write plays? Why did people say Ibsen as if
it were the answer to something? Walking along
Oxford Street with a read volume of Ibsen held
against you is walking along with something
precious between two covers which makes you
know you are rich and free.... She wandered
on and on in an expansion of everything
that passed into her mind out and out towards a
centre in Norway. She wondered whether
Ibsen were still alive. A vast beautiful Norway
and a man writing his thoughts in a made-up
play. Genius. People go about saying Ibsen’s
Brand as if it were the <em>answer</em> to <em>something</em> and
Ibsen knows no more than anyone else....
She arrived at Tansley Street as from a great
distance, suddenly wondering about her relationship
with the sound of carts and near footfalls.
Mrs. Bailey was standing in the doorway seeing
someone off. <em>Eve</em>. Forgotten. I couldn’t get
here before; I’m <em>so</em> sorry. Mrs. Bailey had disappeared.
Eve stepped back into the hall and
stood serenely glowing in the half-light. Are
you going? I must, in a minute. Eve was looking
<a class="pagenum" title="167" id="page-167"/>
sweet; slenderly beautiful and with her crimson-rose
bloom; shy and indulgent and unenviously
admiring as she had been at home; and Mrs.
Bailey had been having it all. Can’t you come
upstayers? Not this time; I’ll come again some
time. Well; you must just tell me; wot you
been doing? Talking to Mrs. Bailey? Yes.
Eve had been flirting with Mrs. Bailey; perhaps
talking about religion. Isn’t she funny? I <em>like</em>
her; she’s perfectly <em>genuine</em>, she means what she
says and really <em>likes</em> people. Yes; I know. Isn’t
it funny? I don’t think it’s funny; it’s very
beautiful and rare. Would you like to be here
always? Yes; I could be always with Mrs.
Bailey. Every day of your life for ever and ever?
<em>Rather.</em> Yes; I know. And y’know there are all
<em>sorts</em> of interesting people. I wish you lived here
Eve. Eve glanced down wisely smiling and moved
slenderly towards the door. What about Sunday?
Couldn’t you come round for a long time? No
breathed Eve restrainingly, I’m going to <em>Sallies</em>.
All Eve’s plans were people. She moved, painfully,
through things, from person to person.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-4">
<a class="pagenum" title="168" id="page-168"/>
4
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Dr. Hurd held the door wide for Miriam to
pass out and again his fresh closely knit worn
brick-red face was deeply curved by the ironically
chuckling hilarious smile with which he had met
the incidents of the “awful German language.”
That of the <em>fatherland</em>, the happy <em>fatherland</em>,
nearly <em>dislocates</em> my <em>jaw</em> she could imagine him
heartily and badly singing with a group of
Canadian students. She smiled back at him
without saying anything, rapidly piecing together
the world that provoked his inclusive deeply
carved smiles; himself, the marvellous little old
country he found himself in as an incident of the
business of forcing himself to be a doctor, his
luck in securing an accomplished young English
lady to prepare him for the struggle with the
great medical world of Germany; his triumphant
chuckling satisfaction in getting in first before
the other fellows with an engagement to take
her out.... The grandeur of this best bedroom
of Mrs. Bailey was nothing to him. The room
was just a tent in his wanderings.... For the
moment he was going to take a young lady to a
concert. That was how he saw it. He was a
<a class="pagenum" title="169" id="page-169"/>
simple boyish red-haired open extension of Dr.
von Heber. When she found herself out in the
large grime and gloom of the twilit landing she
realised that he had lifted her far further than
Dr. von Heber into Canada; he was probably
more Canadian. The ancient gloom of the house
was nothing to him, he would get nothing of the
quality of England in his personal life there, only
passing glimpses from statements in books and in
the conversation of other people. He did not
see her as part of it all in the way Dr. von Heber
had done talking at the table that night and wanting
to talk to her because she was part of it. He
saw her as an accomplished young lady, but a
young lady like a Canadian young lady and a
fellow was a fool if he did not arrange to take her
out quick before the other fellows. But there was
nothing in it but just that triumph. “I’ll get
a silk hat before Sunday”; he would prepare for
her to go all the way down to the Albert Hall as
a young lady being taken to a concert; the Albert
Hall on Sunday was brass bands; he thought they
were a concert. His world was thin and open; but
the swift sunlit decision and freedom of his
innocent reception of her in his bedroom lifted
the dingy brown house of her long memories into
<a class="pagenum" title="170" id="page-170"/>
a new background. She was to be fêted, in an
assumed character and whether she liked it or no.
The four strange men in the little back sitting-room were her competing 
friends, the friends of
all nice young ladies. He was the one who had
laughed the laugh she had heard in the hall, of
course. They never appeared but somehow they
had got to know of her and had their curious
baseless set ways of thinking and talking about
her. Being doctors and still students they ought
to be the most hateful and awful kind of men in
relation to women, thinking and believing all the
horrors of medical science; the hundred golden
rules of gynæcology; if they had been Englishmen
they would have gone about making one
want to murder them; but they did not; Dr.
Hurd was studying gyn’kahl’jy, but he did not
apply its ugly lies to life; to Canadians women
were people ... but they were all the <em>same</em>
people to Dr. Hurd.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-5">
5
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
That evening both Dr. Heber and Dr.
Hurd appeared at dinner. Mrs. Bailey tumultuously
arranged them opposite each other to her
<a class="pagenum" title="171" id="page-171"/>
right and left. Miriam could not believe they
were going to stay until they sat down. She
retreated to the far end of the table taking her
place on Sissie’s right hand, separated from Dr.
von Heber by the thin Norwegian and the protruding
bulk of Mrs. Barrow. Mr. Mendizabal
with a pencil and paper at the side of his plate
was squarely opposite to her. His <em>méfiant</em>
sallies to the accompaniment of Sissie’s giggles
and Miss Strong’s rapid sarcastic remarks, made a
tumult hiding her silence. She heard nothing of
the various conversations sprouting easily all
round the table. The doctors were far-off
strongholds of serenity, unconscious of their
serenity, unconscious of her and of their extraordinary
taking of the Baileys and Mr. Gunner
for granted.... Dr. von Heber was a
silence broken by small courteously curving remarks.
Dr. Hurd laughed his leaping delighted
laugh in and out of an unmeditated interchange
with Mr. Gunner and Mrs. Bailey. If she had
been at their end of the table they would not have
perceived her thoughts, but they would have felt
her general awareness and got up at last disliking
her. They changed the atmosphere but could
not make her forget the underlying unchanged
<a class="pagenum" title="172" id="page-172"/>
elements nor rid her of her resentment of their
unconsciousness of them. There was a long
interval before the puddings appeared. Mrs.
Bailey was trying to answer questions about books.
Dr. Hurd did not care for reading, but liked to be
read to, by his sisters, in the evening, and had
come away, at the most exciting part of a book
... a wonderful authoress, what’s her name
now——Rosie——Newchet.... He was
just longing to know how it ended. Was it sweet
and wonderful, or too dreadful for anything to
contemplate a student, a fully qualified doctor
having Rosa Nouchette Carey read to him by his
sisters? Dr. von Heber was not joining in. Did
he read novels and like them? No one had anything
to say; no one here knew even of Rosa
Nouchette Carey ... and that man Hunter
... he’s great ... he’s father’s favourite;
what’s this, Mr. Barnes of New York.... Archibald
Clavering Gunter said Miriam suddenly,
longing to be at the other end of the table. Beg
pardon? said Sissie turning aside for a moment
from watching Mr. Mendizabal’s busy pencil.
There he is shouted Mr. Mendizabal flinging out
his piece of paper—gastric ulcer—there he is.
There was a drawing of a sort of crab with huge
<a class="pagenum" title="173" id="page-173"/>
claws.—My beautiful gastric ulcer—Have you
been to the ’ospital to-day Mr. Mendizzable asked
Mrs. Bailey through the general laughter. I have
been madame and I come away. They say they
welcome me inside again soon. Je <a id="corr-35"/>m’en fiche.
The faces of both doctors were turned enquiringly.
Dr. Hurd’s look of quizzical sympathy
passed on towards Miriam and became a mask of
suppressed hysterical laughter. Perhaps he and
Dr. Heber would scream and yell together afterwards
and make a great story of a man in a
London pension. Dr. Hurd would call him a
<em>cure</em>. My word isn’t that chap a <em>cure</em>? Brave
little man. Caring for nothing. How could he
possibly have a gastric ulcer and look so hard and
happy and strong. <em>What</em> was Dr. von Heber
silently thinking? The doctors disappeared as
soon as dinner was over, Dr. von Heber gravely
rounding the door with some quiet formal
phrases of politeness, and the group about the
table broke up. He’s a bit pompous Mr. Gunner
was saying presently to someone from the hearthrug.
Was he daring to speak of Dr. von Heber?
Presently there were only the women left in the
room. Miriam felt unable to depart and hung
about until the table was cleared and sat down
<a class="pagenum" title="174" id="page-174"/>
under the gas protected by her note-book. The
room was very quiet. Sissie and Mrs. Bailey were
mending near a lamp at the far end of the table.
Miriam’s thoughts left her suddenly. The tide
of life had swept away leaving an undisturbed
stillness, a space swept clear. She was empty and
nothing. In all the clamour that had passed she
had no part. In all the noise that lay ahead,
no part. Strong people came and went and
never ceased, coming and going and acting
ceaselessly, coming and going, and here, at her
centre, was nothing, lifeless thoughtless nothingness.
The four men studied apart in the little
room, away from the empty lifeless nothingness ...
the door opened quietly. Mrs. Bailey
and Sissie looked expectantly up and were silent.
Something had come into the room. Something
real, clearing away the tumult and compelling
peaceful silence. She exerted all her force to
remain still and apparently engrossed, as Dr. von
Heber placed an open note-book and a large
volume on the table exactly opposite to where
she sat and sat down. He did not see that she was
astonished at his coming nor her still deeper
astonishment in the discovery of her unconscious
certainty that he would come. A haunting
<a class="pagenum" title="175" id="page-175"/>
familiar sense of unreality possessed her. Once
more she was part of a novel; it was right,
true like a book, for Dr. Heber to come in in
defiance of everyone, bringing his studies into
the public room in order to sit down quietly
opposite this fair young English girl. He saw her
apparently gravely studious and felt he could
‘pursue his own studies’ all the better for her
presence. She began writing at random, assuming
as far as possible the characteristics he was reading
into her appearance. If only it were true; but
there was not in the whole world the thing he
thought he saw. Perhaps if he remained steadily
like that in her life she could grow into some
semblance of his steady reverent observation. He
did not miss any movement or change of expression.
Perhaps you need to be treated as an object
of romantic veneration before you can become
one. Perhaps in Canada there were old-fashioned
women who <em>were</em> objects of romantic veneration
all their lives, living all the time as if they were
Maud or some other woman from Tennyson. It
<em>was</em> glorious to have a real, simple homage coming
from a man who was no simpleton, coming simple,
strong and kindly from Canada to put you in a
shrine.... I have always liked those old-fashioned
<a class="pagenum" title="176" id="page-176"/>
stories because I have always known
they were <em>true</em>. They have lived on in Canada.
Canadian men have kept something that Englishmen
are losing. She turned the pages of her note-book
and came upon the scrap crossed through by
Mr. Mendizabal. She read the words through
forcing them to accept a superficial meaning.
Disturbance about ideas would destroy the perfect
serenity that was demanded of her. Be good
sweet maid and let who will be clever. Easy
enough if one were perpetually sustained by a
strong and adoring hand. Perhaps more difficult
really to be good than to be clever. Perhaps there
were things in this strong man that were not
perfectly good and serene. He exacted his own
serenity by sheer force; that was why he worshipped
and looked for natural serenity....
Presently she stirred from her engrossment and
looked across at him as if only just aware of his
presence. He did not meet her look but a light
came on his face and he raised his head and turned
towards the light to aid her observation. The
things that are beginning to be called silly futile
romances are true. Here <em>is</em> the strong silent man
who does not want to talk and grin.... He
would love laughter. Freed from worries and
<a class="pagenum" title="177" id="page-177"/>
sustained by him one could laugh all one’s
laughter out and dance and sing through life to a
happy sunsetting.... Was he <em>religious</em>?
She found she had risen to her feet with decision
and began collecting her papers in confusion as
if she had suddenly made a great clamour. Dr.
Heber rose at once and with some quiet murmuring
remark went away from the room. Miriam
felt she must get into the open and go far on and
on and on. Going upstairs through the house
and into her room for her outdoor things she
found her own secret belongings more her own.
In the life she shyly glanced at, out away somewhere
in the bright blaze of Canadian sunshine
her own secret belongings would be more her
own. That was one of the secrets of the sheltered
life ... one of the things behind the
smiles of the sheltered women; their own secret
certainties intensified because they were surrounded;
perhaps in Canada men respected the
secret certainties of women which they could
never share. With your feet on that firm ground
what would it matter how life went on and on?
There was someone in the hall. Mr. Mendizabal
in a funny little short overcoat.
</p>
<p>
“You go out Miss?” he said cheerfully.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="178" id="page-178"/>
“I’m going for a walk,” she said eagerly, her
eyes on the clear grey and black of the hat he was
taking from the hall stand.
</p>
<p>
“I too go for a walk” he murmured cramming
the soft hat on to his resisting hair and opening
the door for her.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-6">
6
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
This was one of those <em>mild</em> February days; it
is a mistake to imagine that the winter is gone;
but it is gone in your mind; you can see ahead
two summers and only one winter. I go with you
was meant as a question.... It was on the tip
of her tongue to turn and say you should have
said shall I go with you; she was rebuked by a
glimpse of Mr. Mendizabal swinging sturdily
unconsciously along on the gutter side of the
narrow width of pavement, swinging his stick, the
strong modelling of his white face unconscious
under his strong black hair and the jaunty sweep
of his black banded grey hat. “Jaunty and
debonair”; but without a touch of weakness.
What a lovely <em>mild</em> evening; extraordinary for
the time of year; he would be furious at being
interrupted for that, thinking of her as a stiff
<a class="pagenum" title="179" id="page-179"/>
formal institutrice and shouting something ironic
that would bring the world about their ears.
Quel beau temps; that was it.
</p>
<p>
“Quel <em>beau</em> temps.” They had reached the
Gower Street curb and stood waiting to plunge
through the passing traffic.
</p>
<p>
“Une soirée superbe mademoiselle” shouted
Mr. Mendizabal in a smooth flattened squeal as
they crossed side by side; “hah-<em>eh</em>!” he squealed
pushing her off to dart clear of a hansom and away
to the opposite curb. Miriam pulled back just in
time, receiving the angry yell of the driver full in
her upturned face. Mr. Mendizabal was waiting
unconcernedly outside the chemist’s, singing, with
French words. She disposed hastily of the incident,
eager to be walking on through the darkness towards
the mingled darkness and gold of the coming streets.
They went along past the grey heights of University
College Hospital, separate creatures of
mysteriously different races; she expected that
when they reached the light she would find herself
alone—and swung with one accord round
into the brilliance of the Tottenham Court
Road; the tide of light and sound raising them
into a companionship that needed no bending
into shapes of conversation. It was something
<a class="pagenum" title="180" id="page-180"/>
to him and it was something to her, and they
threaded their way together, meeting and separating
and rejoining, unanimous and apart. We are
both <a id="corr-36"/>batteurs de pavé, she thought; both
people who must be free to be nothing; saying
to everything je m’en fiche ... the hushed
happiness that had begun in the dining-room
half an hour ago seized her again suddenly, sending
her forward almost on tiptoe. It was securely
there; the vista it opened growing in beauty as
she walked. There was some source of light
within her, something that was ready to spread
out all round her and ahead and flow over the
past. It confirmed scenes she had read and wondered
at and cherished, seeking in vain in the
world for women who were like the women
described in them. She understood what women
in books meant by <em>sacred</em> “It is all too sacred for
<em>words</em>.” There was no choice in all that; only
secret and sacred beauty; unity with all women
who had felt in the same way; the freedom of
following certainties. Outside it was this other
<a id="corr-37"/>self untouched and always new, her old free
companion attending to no one. She tossed Mr.
Mendizabal shreds of German or French whenever
the increasing throng of passing pedestrians
<a class="pagenum" title="181" id="page-181"/>
allowed them to walk for a moment side by
side.
</p>
<p>
His apparent oblivion of her incoherence gave
full freedom to her delight in her collection of
idioms and proverbs. Each one flung out with
its appropriate emphasis and the right foreign
intonation gave her a momentary change of
personality. He caught the shreds and returned
them woven into phrases increasing her store of
convincing foreignness, comfortably, from the
innocence of his polyglot experience, requiring
no instructive contribution from her, reassuringly
assuming her equal knowledge, his conscious
response being only to her joyousness, his eyes
wide ahead, his features moulded to gaiety. The
burden of her personal dinginess and resourcelessness
in a strong resourceful world was hidden by
him because he was not aware of dinginess and
resourcelessness anywhere. Dingy and resourceless
she wandered along keeping as long as her
scraps of convincing impersonation should hold
out, to her equal companionship with his varied
experience; bearing within her in secret unfathomable
abundance the gift of ideal old-English
rose and white gracious adorable womanhood
given her by Dr. Heber. At the turning
<a class="pagenum" title="182" id="page-182"/>
into Oxford Street they lost each other. Miriam
wandered in solitude amidst jostling bodies. The
exhausted air rang with lifeless strident voices in
shoutings and heavy thick flattened unconcerned
speech; even from above a weight seemed to
press. Clearer space lay ahead; but it was the
clear space of Oxford Street and pressed upon her
without ray or break. Once it had seemed part
of the golden west-end; but Oxford Street was
not the west-end. It was more lifeless and hopeless
than even the north of London; more
endurable because life was near at hand. Oxford
Street was like a prison ... the embarrassment
of her enterprise came upon her suddenly;
the gay going off was at an end; perhaps she
might get away and back home alone up a side
street. Amidst the shouting of women and the
interwoven dark thick growlings of conversations
she heard Mr. Mendizabal’s ironic snorting laugh
not far behind her. Glancing round from the
free space of darkness she had reached she saw
him emerge shouldering from a group of women,
short and square and upright and gleaming
brilliantly with the remains of his laughter. A
furious wrath flickered over her. He came
forward with his eyes ahead unseeing, nearer,
<a class="pagenum" title="183" id="page-183"/>
near, safe at her side, <em>her</em> little foreign Mr.
Mendizabal, mild and homely.
</p>
<p>
Here is Ruscino’s mademoiselle, <em>all</em>ons, we will
go to Ruscino <em>all</em>ons! Ruscino, in electric lights
round the top of the little square portico, like
the name of a play round the portico of a theatre,
the sentry figure of the commissionaire, the
passing glimpse of palm ferns standing in semi-darkness
just inside the portico, the darkness
beyond, suddenly became a place, separate and
distinct from the vague confusion of it in her
mind with the Oxford Music Hall; offering
itself, open before her, claiming to range itself
in her experience; open, with her inside and the
mysteries of the portico behind ... continental
London ahead of her, streaming towards her
in mingled odours of continental food and wine,
rich intoxicating odours in an air heavy and
parched with the flavour of cigars, throbbing
with the solid, filmy thrilling swing of music. It
was a café! Mr. Mendizabal was evidently a
habitué. She could be, by right of her happiness
abroad. She was here as a foreigner, all her
English friends calling her back from a spectacle
she could not witness without contamination.
Only Gerald knew the spectacle of Ruscino’s.
<a class="pagenum" title="184" id="page-184"/>
“Lord, Ruscino’s; <em>Lord</em>”.... In a vast
open space of light, set in a circle of balconied
gloom, innumerable little tables held groups
of people wreathed in a brilliancy of screened
light, veiled in mist, clear in sharp spaces of light,
clouded by drifting spirals of smoke. They sat
down at right angles to each other at a little
table under the central height. The confines of
the room were invisible. All about them were
worldly wicked happy people.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-6-7">
7
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
She could understand a life that spent all its
leisure in a café; every day ending in warm
brilliance, forgetfulness amongst strangers near
and intimate, sharing the freedom and forgetfulness
of the everlasting unchanging café, all
together in a common life. It was like a sort of
dance, everyone coming and going poised and
buoyant, separate and free, united in freedom. It
was a heaven, a man’s heaven, most of the women
were there with men, somehow watchful and
dependent, but even they were forced to be free
from troublings and fussings whilst they were
<a class="pagenum" title="185" id="page-185"/>
there ... the wicked cease from troubling
and the weary are at rest ... she was there as
a man, a free man of the world, a continental, a
cosmopolitan, a connoisseur of women. That
old man sitting alone with a grey face and an
extinguished eye was the end of it, but even now
the café held him up; he would come till death
came too near to allow him movement. He was
horrible, but less horrible than he would be alone
in a room; he had to keep the rules and manage to
behave; as long as he could come he was still in
life.... White muslin wings on a black straw
hat, a well-cut check costume and a carriage,
bust forward, an elegant carriage imposing
secrets and manners.... Miriam turned to
watch her proceeding with a vague group of
people through the central light towards the
outer gloom. Voilà une petite qui est jolie she
remarked judicially.—Une jeune fille avec ses
parents—rebuked Mr. Mendizabal. Even he,
wicked fast little foreigner did not know how
utterly meaningless his words were. He was here,
in Ruscino’s quite simply. He sat at home, at
the height of his happy foreign expansiveness.
He had no sense of desperate wickedness. He
gave no help to the sense of desperate wickedness;
<a class="pagenum" title="186" id="page-186"/>
pouring like an inacceptable nimbus from his
brilliant strong head was a tiresome homeliness.
She flung forth to the music, the shining fronds
of distant palm ferns; sipped her liqueur with
downcast eyes and thought of an evening along
the digue at Ostend, the balmy air, the telescoping
brilliant interiors of the villas, the wild arm-linked
masquerading stroll, Elsie had really looked
like an unprincipled Bruxelloise ... foreigners
were all innocent in their depravity.... To
taste the joy of depravity one must be English....
Hah; Strelinsky! Ça va bien, hein? A
figure had risen out of the earth at Mr. Mendizabal’s
elbow and stood looking down at him;
another foreigner. She glanced with an air of
proprietorship; a slender man in a thin faded
grey overcoat, a sharp greyish yellow profile and
small thin head under a dingy grey felt hat.
Strelinsky. Mr. Mendizabal stood sturdily up
bowing with square outstretched hand, wrapped
in the radiating beam of his smile. I present you
Mr. Strelinsky. A musician. A composer of
music. His social manner was upon him again;
fatherliness, strong responsible hard-working kindliness.
The face under the grey hat turned
slowly towards her. She bowed and looked into
<a class="pagenum" title="187" id="page-187"/>
eyes set far back in the thin mask of the face. Her
eyes passed a question from the expressionless
eyes to the motionless expressionless face. How
could he be a composer; looking so ...
vanishing? Strelinsky ... Morceau pour
piano ... that must be <em>he</em> standing here; did
you write this she said abruptly and hummed the
beginning. It sounded shapeless and toneless,
but there was a little tune just ahead. She broke
off short of it not sure that he was attending;
the world burst into laughter; his face turned
slowly and stopped looking downwards across her,
his eyes fixed in a dead repetition of the laughter
in which she was drowning. He stood in space in
a faded coat and hat, a colourless figure clothed
by her feebleness in lively dignity and wisdom
... grouped inaccessibly beyond the vast
space were solid tables filled with judges; dim
figures stood in judgment in the amber light
under the gallery where palms stood; she was
drowning alone, surrounded by a distant circle
of palms. Eleven. We must go miss stated Mr.
Mendizabal cordially. Miriam rose. The tide
of café life flowed all round her. She wandered
blissfully out through the misty smoke-wreathed
golden light, threading her way amongst the
<a class="pagenum" title="188" id="page-188"/>
tables towards the black and gold of the streets.
Far away behind her, staying in the evening,
Strelinsky blocked the view, moving, fixed avertedly,
with eyes in his shoulders along an endless
narrowing distance of café.
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-7">
<a class="pagenum" title="189" id="page-189"/>
CHAPTER VII
</h2>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> found her old prayer-book and
scribbled her name on the flyleaf....
Bella de Castro writing <em>from mother</em> under her
name in her bible ... <em>feeling</em> something,
privately, not knowing that anyone would see it....
The sunlight pouring in on the thin
bible page; the words written plumply with one
of Bella’s blunt uncared-for pencils. Her thick
ropy black plait, brilliant oily Italian eyes in her
long fat handsome face; staring out of the
window sullenly waiting for schooldays to be at
an end; her handsome horrible brother on horseback;
just the same; the high-water marks
above her wrists when she washed her hands, and
then, from mother, stubbed carefully, <em>meaning</em>.
</p>
<p>
The pencilled <em>Miriam</em> gave a false meaning to
the prayer-book. There was no indiarubber, she
would have to take it down as it was. It was a
letter, written to Dr. von Heber, supposed to be
written when she was a girl.... She carried
<a class="pagenum" title="190" id="page-190"/>
the book downstairs. The Baileys were still
sitting by the fire with their backs to Dr. von
Heber standing alone in the twilight in the middle
of the room. She came forward, handing the
book stiffly and sat busily down to the piano again,
angrily recording his quiet formal thanks and
silent swift departure. She began playing where
she had left off; telling Dr. von Heber as he went
downstairs that he had come up and made a
scene and interrupted her; that her chosen
evening was to sit, with the Baileys, playing the
piano; that she was not a church-goer.
</p>
<p>
He had come so suddenly; after so long; if
she had not been so lost in the disappointing
evening she would have been ready. If she had
not suddenly been so prepared, so rushing forward
and feeling after he had spoken as if the words had
been long ago and they had been to church
together and come back before all the world there
would not have been in his voice the reproachful
affronted anticipation of her stupidity.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Perhaps he had really suddenly thought downstairs
that it would be nice to go to church, not
knowing that that was one of the real effects of
falling in love ... just thinking in the course
<a class="pagenum" title="191" id="page-191"/>
of his worldly studies that there was church and
he was in himself a church-goer and ought to go
more often and coming up to borrow a prayer-book
from the <em>Baileys</em>. No. Suddenly in the
room, standing in the unknown drawing-room for
the first time in his steady urbane confident way,
waiting, a little turned towards the piano. The
Baileys had neither spoken nor moved; they were
afraid of him; but Mrs. Bailey would have made
herself say, Well, doctor, to the amazing apparition.
They simply waited, held off by his waiting
manner. “<em>I think this is a good evening to go to
church.</em>” What have you been doing all this time?
Where do you go, going out so often? What are
you doing sitting here playing? We ought to be
going to church; we two. Here I am professing
church-going and idiotically confessing myself
come all the way from Canada without a prayer-book
and making a pretence of borrowing your
prayer-book because we <em>must</em> be in church together.
Dr. Hurd’s impressions had had no effect
upon him.... But now he had gone back
into his own life not only thinking that she was
not a church-goer, but feeling sure that her own
private life of coming and going had no thoughts
of him in it.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="192" id="page-192"/>
Dr. Hurd sitting on the omnibus with <em>amusement</em>
carving deep lines on his brick-red face and
splintering out of his eyes into the hot afternoon
glare; the neat new bowler with the red hair
coming down underneath it, the well-cut Montreal
clothes on his tough neat figure; immovable,
there for the afternoon. Forced to go on and
on isolated with the brick-red grin and the
splintering green eyes through the afternoon heat,
in the midst of a glare of omnibus people, on
their way to a brass band in the Albert Hall,
thinking they were going to a <em>concert</em>. He did
not know what made a concert. Sitting with the
remains of his grin, waiting for the things he had
been taught to admire, unable to find anything
without his mother and sisters; missing Canadian
ladies with opinions about everything; waiting
all the time to be managed in the Canadian
women’s way.... He must have told the
others about it afterwards, his face crinkling at
them and they listening and agreeing.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
It had begun the moment after he had suggested
the concert. I’ll get a new top hat before
then. The awful demand for a jest. His way of
waiting as if one were some queer being he was
<a class="pagenum" title="193" id="page-193"/>
waiting to see say or do something anyone could
understand was the same as the English way only
more open. But English people like that did not
care for music and did not have books read to
them. Perhaps his parents belonged to the other
sort of English and he had the stamp of it,
promising seriousness and a love of beautiful
things, and forced by life into the jesting way of
worldly people who seemed to have no sacred
patches at all. Quick words, bathed in laughter
heaped up into a questioning of what the <em>matter</em>
was. Men, demanding jests and amusement;
women succeeding only by jesting satirically
about everything.
</p>
<p>
Von Heber’s a man who’ll <em>carve</em> his way....
My. He’s <em>great</em>. Carve his way; one of those
phrases that satisfy and worry you; short, and
leaving out nearly everything; Dr. von Heber
going through life with a chisel, intent on carving;
everybody envying him; the von Heber not seen
or realised; his way is carved, he <em>is</em> his way ...
going ahead further and further away as one listened.
His poverty and drudgery behind him, at
Winnipeg, amongst the ice. Hoisting himself out
of it, <em>making</em> himself into a doctor; a graduate
of “McGill” ... standing out among the
<a class="pagenum" title="194" id="page-194"/>
graduates with even the very manner of success
more marked in him than in them with their
money and ease; sailing to England steady-minded
in the awful risk of borrowed money ...
it’s wrong, insulting to him to think of it while
he is still in the midst of the effort ... a sort
of treachery to know the details at all ...
the <em>impossibility</em> of not dwelling on them. But
thinking disperses his general effect. In the
strength and sunshine of him there is power. The
things he has done are the power in him; no
need to know the gossipy details; that was why
the facts sounded so familiar; reproachful, as
Dr. Hurd brought them out....
</p>
<p>
I knew <em>all</em> about him when I met his sunshine.
I ought to have rushed away garlanded with
hawthorn, with some woman, and waited till he
came again. Dr. Hurd looks like an old woman;
an old gossip. Old men are worse gossips <a id="corr-39"/>than
old women. They can’t keep their hands off.
They make phrases. Dr. Hurd is a dead, dead
old woman. Handling things like an old man. It
was so natural to listen. ‘Natural’ things get
you lost and astray ... kiss-in-the-ring ‘just
a little harmless nonsense ... there’s no harm in
a little gay nonsense chickie.’ There’s no such
<a class="pagenum" title="195" id="page-195"/>
thing as harmless nonsense: Dissipation makes
you forget everything. Secret sacred places.
George and John faithful and steady can’t make
those. They smile <em>personally</em> and the room or the
landscape is immediately silly and tame....
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
“I never met a chap who could make so much
of what he knows ... pick up ... and
bring them out better than the chap could himself.”
The four figures sitting in the little room
round the lamp. Dr. Hurd talking his gynæcology
simply; a relief, a clear clean place in the
world of women’s doctors.... Dr. Winchester
talking for Dr. von Heber, his brown beard
and his frock-coat just for the time he was talking
before Dr. von Heber had grasped it all, looking
like a part of the professional world. Dr. Wayneflete’s
white criminal face his little white mouth
controlledly mouthing ... Wayneflete’s brilliant;
but he’s not got von Heber’s strength nor
his manner. He’s quiet though that chap ...
he’d do well over here ... that spreads your
thoughts about, painfully and wholesomely. Dr.
Hurd spreads his thoughts about quite simply....
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The moment was so surprising that I forgot it.
<a class="pagenum" title="196" id="page-196"/>
I always forget the things that surprise me. She
was hating me and hating everything. I must
have told her I was going away. When I said you
can have Bunnikin back she suddenly grew older
than I. “Oh <em>Bunn</em>ikin.” Their beloved Bunnikin,
as smartly dressed as Mrs. Corrie, in the smart
country house way and knowing how to gush and
behave.... “Bunnikin’s too <em>simple</em>.” Sybil
in her blue cotton overall in the amber light in
the Louis Quinze drawing-room, one with me,
wanting me because I was not simple.... I
thought she hated me all the time because I was
not worldly. I should not have known I was not
simple unless she had told me; that child.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
... Dear Mr. Bowdoin ... and I
think I can promise you an audience.... I
regret that I cannot come on Thursday and I am
sincerely sorry that you should think I desired
an audience ... the extraordinary pompous
touchiness of men ... why didn’t he see I
did not dream of suggesting he should come
again just to see me. I’ve forgotten Mr. Bowdoin
... and the Museum ... everything....
I sit here ... playing to hide myself from
the Baileys and he is away somewhere making
<a class="pagenum" title="197" id="page-197"/>
people happy. “They do not care ... they
see me, they shout Ah! Don <em>Clement</em>! I amuse
them, I laugh, they think I am happy. Voilà
tout, mademoiselle.... Il n’y a qu’une
chose qui m’amuse.”
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-8">
<a class="pagenum" title="198" id="page-198"/>
CHAPTER VIII
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-8-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">A</span> day of blazing heat changed the season
suddenly. Flat threatening sunlight travelled
round the house. The shadowy sun-blinded
flower-scented waiting-room held street-baked
patients in its deep armchairs. Some
of them were languid. But none of them suffered.
They kept their freshness and freedom from
exhaustion by living away from toil and grimy
heat; in cool clothes, moving swiftly through
moving air in carriages and holland-blinded
hansoms; having ices in expensive shade; being
waited on in the cool depths of west-end houses;
their lives disturbed only by occasional dentistry.
The lean dark patients were like lizards, lively
and darting and active even in the sweltering
heat.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam’s sunless room was cool all day. Through
her grey window she could see the sunlight
pouring over the jutting windows of Mr. Leyton’s
<a class="pagenum" title="199" id="page-199"/>
small room and reflected in the grimy sheen of
the frosted windows of the den. Her day’s work
was unreal, as easy <a id="corr-41"/>as a dream. All about her were
open sunlit days that her summer could not
bring, and that yet were hers as she moved
amongst them; a leaf dropped in the hall, the
sight of a summer dress, summer light coming
through wide-open windows took her out into
them. Summer would never come again in the
old way, but it set her free from cold, and let
her move about unhampered in the summers of
the past. Summer was happiness.... Individual
things were straws on the stream of
summer happiness.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
At tea time in the den there was a darkening
hush. It was like a guest, turning everyone’s
attention to itself, abolishing differences, setting
free unexpected sympathies. Everyone spoke of
the coming storm and looked beautiful in speaking.
The day’s work was discussed as if in the
presence of an unseen guest.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
She set out from the house of friends to meet
the darkened daylight ... perhaps the
sudden tapping of thunder-drops upon her thin
<a class="pagenum" title="200" id="page-200"/>
blouse. The street was a livid grey, brilliant with
hidden sunlight.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The present can be judged by the part of
the past it brings up. If the present brings
up the happiness of the past, the present is
happy.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Purgatory. The waters of Lethe and Eunoe
‘forgetfulness and sweet memory’; and then
Heaven. The Catholics are right about expiation.
If you are happy in the present something
is being expiated. If life contains moments of
paradise you must be in purgatory looking across
the vale of Asphodel. You can’t be in hell....
Yet hell would not be hell without a knowledge
of heaven. If once you’ve been in heaven
you can never escape. Yet Dante believed in
everlasting punishment.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Bathing in the waters of Lethe and Eunoe
unworthily is drinking one’s own damnation.
But happiness crops up before one can prevent it.
Perhaps happiness is one long sin, piling up a bill....
It is my secret companion. Waiting at
<a class="pagenum" title="201" id="page-201"/>
the end of every dark passage. I did not make
myself. I <em>can’t</em> help it.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Brilliant ... <em>brilliant</em>; and someone was
seeing it. There was no thunderstorm, no clouds
or pink edges on the brilliant copper grey. She
wandered on down the road hemmed by flaring
green. The invisible sun was everywhere. There
was no air, nothing to hold her body separate
from the scene. The grey brilliance of the sky
was upon the pavement and in the green of the
park, making mauve shadows between the trees
and a mist of mauve amongst the further green.
The high house fronts stood out against the grey,
eastern-white, frilled below with new-made green,
sprouting motionlessly as you looked ...
white plaster houses against the blue of the
Mediterranean, grey mimosa trees, green-feathered
lilac of wisteria. Between the houses and
the park the road glared wooden grey, dark,
baked grey, edged with the shadowless stone
grey of the pavement. Summer. Eternity
<em>showing</em>....
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The Euston Road was a narrow hot channel of
noise and unbreathable odours, the dusty exhausting
<a class="pagenum" title="202" id="page-202"/>
cruelty of the London summer, leading
on to the feathery green floored woods of Endsleigh
Gardens edged by grey house fronts, and
ending in the cool stone of St. Pancras Church.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
In the twilit dining-room one’s body was like
a hot sun throbbing in cool dark air, ringed by
cool walls holding darkness in far corners; coolness
poured out through the wide-open windows
towards the rain-cool grey facades of the opposite
houses, cool and cool until the throbbing ceased.
</p>
<p class="tb2">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
All the forms seated round the table were
beautiful; far-away and secret and separate, each
oneself set in the coming of summer, unconscious.
One soul. Summer is the soul of man. Through
all the past months they had been the waiting
guests of summer.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The pain of trying to get back into the moment
of the first vision of spring, the perfect moment
before the thought came that spring was going on
in the country unseen, was over. The moment
came back of itself ... the green flush in the
<a class="pagenum" title="203" id="page-203"/>
squares, the ripples of emerald fringed pink
geraniums along the balconies of white houses.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
After dinner Miriam left the dining-room,
driven joyfully forth, remaining behind, floating
and drifting happily about, united with everyone
in the room as her feet carried her step by step
without destination, going everywhere, up
through the staircase twilight....
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The drawing-room was filled with saffron light,
filtering in through the curtains hanging motionless
before the high French windows. Within
the air of the room, just inside the faint smell of
dusty upholstery was the peace of the new found
summer. Mrs. Bailey’s gift. There had been no
peace of summer last year in her stifling garret.
This year the summer was with her, in the house
where she was. Far away within the peace of the
room was the evening of a hot summer day at
Waldstrasse, the girls sitting about, beautiful
featureless forms together forever in the blissful
twilight of the cool saal and sitting in its little
summer house <em>Ulrica</em>, everybody, her dark
delicate profile lifted towards the garden, her
unconscious pearly beauty grouped against the
<a class="pagenum" title="204" id="page-204"/>
undisturbing presence of Fraulein Pfaff. Miriam
turned to the near window and peered through
the thick mesh of the smoke-yellowed lace
curtain. Behind it the french window stood ajar.
Drawing aside the thick dust-smelling lace she
stepped out and drew the door to behind her.
There were shabby drawing-room chairs standing
in an irregular row on the dirty grey stone,
railed by a balustrade of dark maroon painted
iron railings almost colourless with black grime.
But the elastic outer air was there and away at
the end of the street a great gold pink glow stood
above and showed through the feathery upper
branches of the trees in Endsleigh Gardens. A
number of people must have been sitting out
before dinner. That was part of their dinner-time
happiness. Presently some of them would
come back. She scanned the disposition of the
chairs. The little comfortable circular velvet
chair stood in the middle of the row, conversationally
facing the high-backed wicker chair. The
other chairs were the small stiff velvet-seated
ones. The one at the north end of the balcony
could be turned towards the glowing sky with its
back to the rest of the balcony. She reached and
turned it and sat down. The opposite houses
<a class="pagenum" title="205" id="page-205"/>
with their balconies on which groups were already
forming stood sideways, lost beyond the rim of
her glasses. The balcony of the next house was
empty; there was nothing between her and the
vista of green feathering up into the intense
gold-rose glow.... She could come here
every night ... filling her life with green
peace; preparing for the stifling heat of the
nights in her garret. This year, with dinner in
the cool dining-room and the balcony for the
evening, the summer would not be so unbearable.
She sat still, lifted out into garden freshness....
Benediction.... People were stepping out on
to the balcony behind her, remarking on the
beauty of the evening, their voices new and small
in the outer air.... If she never came out
again this summer would be different. It had
begun differently. She knew what lay ahead and
could be prepared for it.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
She would find coolness at the heart of the
swelter of London if she could keep a tranquil
mind. The coolness at the heart of the central
swelter was wonderful life, from moment to
moment, pure <em>life</em>. To go forward now, from
this moment, alive, keeping alive, through the
<a class="pagenum" title="206" id="page-206"/>
London summer. Even to go away for holidays
would be to break up the wonder, to snap the
secret clue and lose the secret life....
</p>
<p class="tb2">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The rosy gold was deepening and spreading.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam found herself rested as if by sleep. It
seemed as if she had been sitting in the stillness
for a time that was longer than the whole of the
working day. To recover like this every day ...
to have at the end of every day a cool <em>solid</em> clear
head and rested limbs and the feeling that the
strain of work was so far away that it could never
return. The tireless sense of morning and new
day that came in moving from part to part of her
London evenings, and strongest of all at the end
of a long evening, going on from a lecture or a
theatre to endless leisure, reading, the happy
gaslight over her book under the sloping roof,
always left her in the morning unwilling to get up,
and made the beginning of the day horrible with
languor and breakfast a scramble, taken to the
accompaniment of guilty listening for the striking
of nine o’clock from St. Pancras church, and the
angry sense of Mr. Hancock already arriving cool
<a class="pagenum" title="207" id="page-207"/>
and grey clad at the morning door of Wimpole
Street. To-night, going strong and steady to her
hot room, sleep would be silvery cool. She would
wake early and fresh, and surprise them all at
Wimpole Street arriving early and serene after
a leisurely breakfast.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The rosy light shone into far-away scenes with
distant friends. They came into her mind rapidly
one by one, and stayed grouped in a radiance,
sharper and clearer than in experience. She
recalled scenes that had left a sting, something
still to be answered. She saw where she had failed;
her friends saw what she had meant, in some
secret unconscious part of them that was turned
away from the world; in their thoughts with
themselves when they were alone. Her own
judgments, sharply poised in memory upon the
end of some small incident, reversed themselves,
dropped meaningless, returned reinforced, went
forward, towards some clearer understanding.
Her friends drifted forward, coming too near, as
if in competition for some central place. To every
claim, she offered her evening sky as a full answer.
The many forms remained, grouped, like an
audience, confronted by the evening.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="208" id="page-208"/>
The gold was fading, a soft mistiness spreading
through the deepening rose, making the leafage
darker and more opaque. Presently the sky would
be mother-of-pearl above a soft dark mass and
then pure evening grey outlining the dark feathery
tree tops of a London square turning to green
below in the lamplight, sinking to sleep, deeply
breathing out its freshness to meet the freshness
pouring through the streets from the neighbouring
squares. Freshness would steal over the outside
walls of the houses already cool within.
Only in the garrets would the sultry day remain
under the slowly cooling roofs.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
There was still a pale light flowing into the
dusk of the garret. It must be only about nine
o’clock ... the gas flared out making a
winter brilliance ... Four sermons on Dante....
Kuenen’s Life of Dante ... Gemma
Donati, <em>Gemma</em>, busily making puddings in the
world lit by the light of the Mystic Rose; swept
away by the rush of words ... a stout Italian
woman ... <em>Gem</em>ma; Bayatrichay ...
they were bound to reach music ... a silent
Italian woman in a hot kitchen scolding, left out
of the mystic rose ... Lourdes ... Le Nabab
<a class="pagenum" title="209" id="page-209"/>
... atroce comédie de bonheur conjugale
sans relâche ... the Frenchman <em>expressing</em>
what the Englishman only thinks ... “the
wife” ... I met my WIFE! ... red
nose and check trousers, smoky self-indulgent
married man, all the self-indulgent married men
in the audience guffawing ... “You must be
ready to face being taken for granted, you must
hide your troubles, learn to say nothing of your
unnoticed exhausting toil, wear a smile above the
heart that you believe is breaking; stand steady
in face of the shipwreck of all your dreams.
Remember that although he does not know it, in
spite of all his apparent oblivion and neglect, if
you <em>fail</em>, his universe <em>crumbles</em>” ... men live
their childish ignorant lives on a foundation of
pain and exhaustion. Down in the fevered life
of pain and exhaustion there is a deep certainty.
There is no deep certainty in the lives of men. If
there were they would not be forever talking
with conceited guilty lips as if something were
waiting if they stopped, to spring on them from
behind.... The evolution of the Idea of God....
I have forgotten what that is about
... a picture of a sort of Madonna ...
<em>corn</em> goddess, with a child and sheaves of corn....
<a class="pagenum" title="210" id="page-210"/>
The Mechanism of Thought.... Thirty
Sane Criticisms.... Critique de la Pensée
Moderne; traduit par H. Navray, Mercure de
France.... How did he begin? Where was
he when he came out and began saying everybody
was wrong? How did he get to know about it
all? She took down a volume unwillingly ...
there was something being lost, something waiting
within the quiet air of the room that would be
gone if she read. It was not too late. Why did
men write books? Modern men? The book
was open. Her eyes scanned unwillingly. Fabric.
How did he find his words. No one had ever said
<em>fabric</em> about anything. It made the page alive
... a woven carpet, on one side a beautiful
glowing pattern, on the other dull stringy harshness
... there is a dangerous <em>looseness</em> ...
her heart began beating apprehensively. The
room was dead about her. She sat down tense,
and read the sentence through. There is a
dangerous looseness in the fabric of our minds.
She imagined the words spoken, looseness was
ugly, making the mouth ugly in speech. There
is a looseness in the fabric of our minds. That is
what he would have said in conversation, looking
nowhere and waiting to floor an objection. There
<a class="pagenum" title="211" id="page-211"/>
is a dangerous, he had written. That introduced
another idea. You were not supposed to notice
that there were two statements, but to read
smoothly on, accepting. It was deliberate.
Put in deliberately to frighten you into reading
more. Dangerous. The adjective in the sentence,
personal, a matter of opinion. People who
read the books do not think about <em>adjectives</em>.
They like them. Conversation is <em>adjectives</em>!
... all the worry of conversation is because
people use adjectives and rush on.... But
you can’t describe ... but dangerous is not a
descriptive adjective ... there is a twisted
looseness, that describes ... that is Saxon ...
Abendmahl ... dangerous, French ... the
Prince of Wales uses the elegant Norman idiom
... dangerous is an idea, the language of
ideas. It expresses nothing but an opinion about
life ... a threat daring you to disagree.
Dangerous to what?... Man is a badly
made machine ... an oculist could improve
upon the human eye ... and the mind wrong
in some way too ... logic is a cheap arithmetic.
<em>Imagination.</em> What <em>is</em> imagination? Is
it his imagination that has found out that mind
is loose? Is not imagination mind? It is his
<a class="pagenum" title="212" id="page-212"/>
imaginative mind. A special kind of mind. But
if mind discovers that mind is unreliable, its
conclusion is also unreliable. That’s logic ...
Barbara. All Mind is unreliable. Man is mind,
therefore man is unreliable.... Then it is
useless to try and know anything ... books
go on ... he has invented imagination.
Images. Fabric. But he did not invent dangerous.
That is cheek. By this sin fell the angels.
Perhaps he is a fallen angel. I was right when I
told Eve I had sold my soul to the devil....
“Quite a good afterglow” and then wheeling
alertly about to capture and restate some thread ...
and then later, finding you still looking.
“M’yes; a fine ... fuliginous ... <em>pink</em> ...
God’s had a strawberry ice for supper”
... endless inexhaustible objections ... a
cold grim scientific world ... Alma knew it.
In that clear bright house with the satisfying
furniture ... now let’s all make Buddhas.
Let’s see who can make the best Buddha....
Away from them you could forget; but it was
going on all the time ... somehow ahead
of everything else that was going on.... She
got up and replaced the book. It was on her
shelf; a signed copy; extraordinary. It was an
<a class="pagenum" title="213" id="page-213"/>
extraordinary privilege. No one else could write
books like that; no one else knew so much about
everything. Right or wrong it was impossible
to give up hearing all he had to say ... and
they were kind, alive to one’s life in a way other
people were not....
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
She strolled to the window, finding renewal in
the familiar creaking of her floor in the house,
here.... She went back across the happy
creaking and turned out the gas and came again
to the window. The sky was dark enough to show
a brilliant star; here and there in the darkness
of the opposite house fronts was an oblong of
golden light. The faint blue light coming up
from the street lit up the outer edges of the
grey stone window-sills. The air under the
wooden roof of the window space was almost as
close as it was under the immense height of upper
coolness.... Down at the end of the road were
the lamplit green trees; plane-tree shadows on
the narrow pavement. She put on her hat in
the dark.
</p>
<p>
Crossing the roadway to reach the narrow
strip of pavement running along under the trees
she saw single dark figures standing at intervals
<a class="pagenum" title="214" id="page-214"/>
against the brilliant lamplit green and swerved
back to the wide pavement. She had forgotten
they would be there. They stood like sentinels....
Behind them the lamplit green flared
feverishly.... In the shadow of St. Pancras
church there were others, small and black in a
desert ... lost quickly in the great shadow
where the passers-by moved swiftly through
from light to light. Out in the Euston Road
along the pavements shadowed by trees and left
in darkness by the high spindling shaded candles
of the lamps along the centre of the roadway,
they came walking, a foreign walk, steadily slow
and wavy and expressive, here and there amongst
the shapeless expressionless forms of the London
wayfarers. The high stone entrance of Euston
Station shone white across the way. Anyone can
go into a station. Within the entrance gravelled
darkness opened out on either side. Silence all
round and ahead where silent buildings had here
and there a lit window. Where was the station?
Immense London darkness and stillness alone
and deserted like a country place at night, just
beyond the noises of the Euston Road. A murder
might happen here. The cry of an engine
sounded, muffled and far away. Just ahead in
<a class="pagenum" title="215" id="page-215"/>
the centre of the approaching wide mass of
building was a wide dimly lit stone archway. The
rattle of a hansom sounded from an open space
beyond. Its light appeared swaying swiftly
forward and lit the archway. The hansom
bowled through in startling silence, nothing but
the jingle and dumb leathery rattle of the harness,
and passed, the plonking of the horse’s hoofs
and the swift slur of the wheels sounding out again
in the open space. The archway had little side
pathways for passengers roofed by small arching
extensions of the central arch ... <em>indiarubber</em>
... pavement to muffle ... the building
<a id="corr-45"/>was a hotel; Edwards daylight Family Hotel ...
expensive people lodging just above the arch,
travelling, coming to London, going away from
London, with no thought of the dark secret
neighbourhood. A courtyard opened out beyond
the arch. It was not even yet the station. There
was a road just ahead going right and left, with
lamps; just in front to the left across the road a
lit building with a frosted lower window and a
clock ... a post office. Miriam went through
the swing door into warm yellow gaslight. At
the long counter people stood busily occupied
or waiting their turn, with their backs to the
<a class="pagenum" title="216" id="page-216"/>
dusty floor space, not noticing the grey space
of dusty floor and the curious warm gleam of the
light falling upon it from behind the iron grille
along the counter. The clerks were fresh and
serene and unhurried, making a steady quiet
workaday feeling; late at night. It swung the
day round, morning and evening together in the
gaslit enclosure. She stood at the counter sharing
the sense of affairs. She could be a customer for
a penny stamp. Waiting outside was the walk
back through the various darkness, the indiarubber
pathway ... knowing her way.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
She let herself into the hall with an air of
returning from a hurried necessary errand. Beyond
the mysterious Bailey curtains partly screening
the passage to the front door she saw Dr.
Hurd standing at the dining-room door; good
night he laughed back into the room and turned,
meeting her as she emerged into the light. He
paused smiling. Here’s Miss Henderson he said
into the room. Miriam was passing the door.
Aren’t you coming in he urged smiling. Ho, I’ve
just been to the post office said Miriam passing
into the room. Ho, isn’t it a perfect evening
she announced taking in Dr. Wayneflete standing
<a class="pagenum" title="217" id="page-217"/>
tall with small bent pale face at the end of the
table and the other two rising from their places
by the fireside. Dr. Hurd closed the door and
came and flopped down in the easy chair in front
of the piano. I know you won’t sit here Miss
Henderson. No Miss Henderson doesn’t care
for cushions murmured Dr. von Heber at her
side. Take this chair he pursued and sat near as
she sat down in a little stiff chair facing the fireplace,
Dr. Winchester subsiding a little behind
her on the other side.
</p>
<p>
It’s a purfect evening murmured Dr. Wayneflete.
Miriam turned and searched his white
bent face. She had never seen him speaking in a
room. The thought behind the white slightly
bulging forehead was his own, Wayneflete,
brilliant, keeping him apart; the little narrowing
peak of livid white face, the green shadows about
the small pale mouthing lips, the fact of his
heart-disease and his Irish parentage were things
that dared to approach and attach themselves to
him; that people knew.
</p>
<p>
A purfect evening he repeated plucking gently
at the threads of the table cloth. He would
never originate a remark or ask a question except
of patients or an engineer standing near some
<a class="pagenum" title="218" id="page-218"/>
difficult machinery. He knew everything by just
being about. He was head and shoulders above
the other three. Delicate, of gentle blood and
narrow fragile body; a strong spirit; impossible
of approach by speech; everything she said
would carry her away from him; perhaps he was
already planning his escape. One day he would
suddenly fall down, dead; young and unknown
to anyone in the world, carrying away his mystery.
</p>
<p>
“Eleven o’clock.” She had shattered the
silence he had built.
</p>
<p>
“You don’t call that late” said Dr. von Heber
released and rushing to rescue her. He sat bland
and square and simple beneath the coming long
procession of years and days; but his firmly
dimpled swift Canadian smile, brilliant with
the flash of the flawless perfect arch of his
strong even teeth brought past and future into
the moment, giving them to the sudden charm
of this meeting, referring back to that first
evening by the table.
</p>
<p>
“Oh no; it’s frightfully early.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s a most delightful hyperbole.”
</p>
<p>
“I shall summons you for calling me an
isosceles triangle.”
</p>
<p>
Dr. Wayneflete laughed too ... a small
<a class="pagenum" title="219" id="page-219"/>
sound drowned by Dr. Hurd’s thwack on the arm
of his chair as he flung back his head for his
laugh.
</p>
<p>
“It <em>has</em> been wonderful to-day, don’t you
<em>think</em>? Did you see the extraordinary light this
afternoon?”
</p>
<p>
“Well no; we were all of us immured, but
we were out this evening; we thought it the best
specimen of London weather we’d struck so
far.”
</p>
<p>
“There’s nothing whatever the matter with
London weather. It’s <em>perfect</em>; the most perfect
in the world.” Dr. Hurd resumed his shakings
of laughter, restrained to listen. Dr. Winchester
was sitting bent forward smiling dreamily.
</p>
<p>
“I know you won’t like me to call that a
hyperbole, but you won’t quite expect me to say I
unreservedly agree.”
</p>
<p>
“It isn’t a question of agreement or disagreement.
It’s a simple fact.” Dr. Hurd again
struck his chair and sat forward feeling for a
handkerchief in a side pocket, his face a tearful
grin turned upon Dr. von Heber.
</p>
<p>
“You are a loyal champion.”
</p>
<p>
“English weather does not want a champion.
It’s so wonderful. Perhaps you are thinking of
<a class="pagenum" title="220" id="page-220"/>
Italian skies and that sort of thing; in countries
where the weather does not change or not
suddenly; only at fixed seasons. That’s very
nice in a way. You can make plans. But I know
I should long for grey days and changes in the
sky. A grey day is not melancholy; it’s exciting.
You can see everything. The sun makes everything
pale and blinds you.”
</p>
<p>
“There I think you mistaken. Nothing
beautifies like sunlight, and if you’ve the sun
behind you, you get the ahead prospect without
being blinded.”
</p>
<p>
“I know what you mean; but I want both;
for contrast perhaps; no, that’s silly; the grey
days for their own sake, the misty atmosphere.
Fog. I think a real London fog is perfection;
everything and the shapes and outlines of things
looming up only as you pass them. Wonderful.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, there you leave us behind. I can’t see
anything either beautiful or in the least wonderful
in your town fogs.”
</p>
<p>
“Quite so. A taste for town fog is an artificial
taste. Town fog’s not a natural phenomenon.
It’s just, town dirt.”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t care how it begins. It’s perfect. It
makes the whole day <a id="corr-48"/>an adventure even if 
you’re
<a class="pagenum" title="221" id="page-221"/>
indoors. It’s perfect to have the light on and
nothing to be seen outside but a copper glare.
Outside is a glorious adventure in a new unknown
world.... In a way all our weathers are that.
In a way the weather’s enough, in itself, without
anything else.”
</p>
<p>
“That seems to me a remarkable, a very
extra-ordinairy point of view. You can’t in any
circumstances make it a general defence of your
climate. It’s a purely personal notion.”
</p>
<p>
“It isn’t. Even people who say they don’t like
fogs are different; interested in the effect while
it is on.”
</p>
<p>
“Uneasy, no doubt, like animals in a trap.”
</p>
<p>
“I refer to Miss Henderson’s extra-ordinairy
valuation of weather as enough in itself. I
consider that is one of <em>the</em> most <em>extra-ordinairy</em>
points of view I ever heard stated.”
</p>
<p>
“No one can deny the quahl-ty of interest to
the vagaries of your western European climut;
from our point of view it’s all interest and no
climut; ye can’t tell from day to day what
season ye’ll be in and they all seem—stormy.”
</p>
<p>
“The seasons crop up all the year round,
sometimes three in one day. That’s just the
fascinating thing.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="222" id="page-222"/>
“Quite so, we find that varry disturbing.”
</p>
<p>
“Our sudden changes of temperature keep
us hardy.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s true; you’re a hardy people. Your
weather suits you, beyond a doubt.”
</p>
<p>
“In <em>Ireland</em>, the weather changes every few
minutes.”
</p>
<p>
“Hah, Wayneflete.”
</p>
<p>
“Granted. No doubt that assisted my parents
to decide to leave; I don’t wonder at it.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re temperate. You’ve got the sea at a
stone’s throw all round. You don’t have
notable extremes. But there’s our trouble.
Your extremes when they come ain’t arranged
for. There’s no heat like your English heat, and
my word your English houses in the winter’d
take some beating.”
</p>
<p>
“You mean boarding-houses.”
</p>
<p>
“Not entirely. Though I admit your English
hoames are unique in the matter of comfort.
There’s nothing in the world like a real good
<em>English hoame</em>. And not only in the matter of
comfort.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes but look here von Heber. I know your
fine English parlours with fine great fires to sit
around, what they call ‘cosy’ over here, but my
<a class="pagenum" title="223" id="page-223"/>
life why don’t they warm their corridors and
sleeping rooms?”
</p>
<p>
“We don’t be<em>cause</em> it’s unhealthy. A cold
bedroom keeps you hardy and you <em>sleep</em> better.”
</p>
<p>
“And not only warm them but light them.
My word when they take you out of their warm
parlours into cold corridors and land you in an
ice-house with a little bit of a flickering
candle.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re not tempted to read in bed and you
go to sleep in healthy bracing air; it keeps you
<em>hardy</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“Do you never read after you retire?”
</p>
<p>
“I do; and have the gas and a lamp to keep
warm. I like warm rooms and I think in many
ways it must be lovely to be able to wear muslin
dresses indoors in snowy weather and put on a
fur coat to go out; but I should be sorry to see
the American warm house idea introduced into
England.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re willing to be inconsistent then.”
</p>
<p>
“Consistency is the something of something
minds.”
</p>
<p>
“I guess our central-heated residences would
appeal to you.”
</p>
<p>
“I know they would. But I should freeze
<a class="pagenum" title="224" id="page-224"/>
in the winter; because I shouldn’t be able to
wear a fur coat.”
</p>
<p>
“How so?”
</p>
<p>
“I’m an anti-vivisectionist.”
</p>
<p>
“Then you’d best stay where they’re not
needed. Your winters don’t call for them. It’s
the funniest thing in <em>life</em> the way your wimmun
go around in furs.”
</p>
<p>
“Furs are frightfully becoming; like lace and
violets.”
</p>
<p>
“Then you exonerate them although you’re
against the slaying evidently, as well as the use of
beasts for experiment.”
</p>
<p>
“They don’t think.”
</p>
<p>
“My word that’s true; but all the thinking
in creation won’t keep an Esquimau warm
without furs.”
</p>
<p>
“There’s no need for anyone to live up there.
The Hudson’s Bay Commissioners are tradespeople.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s a big proposition.”
</p>
<p>
“Well?”
</p>
<p>
“You’d advocate everyone living in temperate
climes to spare the beasts?”
</p>
<p>
“There’s no reason except trade for anyone
to live in snow.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="225" id="page-225"/>
“There’s a mighty except.”
</p>
<p>
“Well?”
</p>
<p>
“What about phthisical subjects who need
dry cold climes?”
</p>
<p>
“Wool and astrakhan.”
</p>
<p>
“Well I guess furs’ll be worn for a bit yet.”
</p>
<p>
“That doesn’t affect the question.”
</p>
<p>
“I gather you reckon the beasts oughtn’t
help advance science.”
</p>
<p>
“They don’t. Doctors are as ill as anybody.”
</p>
<p>
“True enough. You consider that invalidates
medical science?”
</p>
<p>
“Of course they are over-worked and many of
them splendid. But illness doesn’t decrease. If
one disease goes down another goes up.”
</p>
<p>
“Great <em>Cæsar</em>, where did you come across
that?”
</p>
<p>
“Even so; but suppose they <em>all</em> went
up?”
</p>
<p>
“Besides, you talk about animals advancing
science. Even if there wasn’t that great French
physiologist or chemist or something who looked
at the result of experiments on animals and said
hélàs, nous avons les mains vides. He declared
that there’s nothing to be learned about <em>human</em>
bodies from animals and even if there were the
<a class="pagenum" title="226" id="page-226"/>
thing is that the animals have no choice. We’ve
no right to force them to suffer.”
</p>
<p>
“An animal’s constituted differently to a man.
You can’t compare them in the matter of sensitiveness
to pain.”
</p>
<p>
“I knew you’d say that. If people really want
to advance science by experiments on bodies they
should offer their own bodies.”
</p>
<p>
“Someone’s been working on your mind if you
believe animals suffer more than men.”
</p>
<p>
“I’d rather see a woman suffer than a man
and a man rather than a child and a child rather
than an animal. Animals are bewildered and
don’t understand. They have nothing to help
them. They don’t understand their sufferings.”
</p>
<p>
“You rate men lower than women in power
to endure pain.”
</p>
<p>
“They get more practice.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re right there.”
</p>
<p>
“They’re less sensitive.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s debateable, Wayneflete.”
</p>
<p>
“Women appear to be callous over the sufferings
of other women and to make a fuss over men.
It’s because sick men are more helpless and pitiful.
Women <em>appear</em> to be. But the sun <em>appears</em> to go
round the earth.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="227" id="page-227"/>
“I doubt if ever there’ll come a time when we’ll
have live humanity in our experimental laboratories.”
</p>
<p>
“Science has got to go ahead anyway.”
</p>
<p>
“But if it goes ahead by forcing; sensitive
creatures; with ... sensitive nervous systems,
to bear fear and pain ... we shall lose
more morally than we shall gain scientifically
even if we gain scientifically and we don’t
because nearly everyone is <em>ill</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“You consider knahludg can be bought at
too high a price.”
</p>
<p>
“Well; look at the continental luminaries;
where there are no restrictions; they don’t even
care about their patients, only diseases interest
them, and in general, not only in science, they
don’t really know anything, the Germans and
the French, you have only to look at them.
They are brutal.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s a large statement. If you’ll pardon me
I should say there’s a certain amount of insular
prejudice in that.”
</p>
<p>
“I have not a scrap of insular prejudice. I like
foreigners. They are more intelligent than
Englishmen. But there’s something they don’t
know that makes them all alike. I once heard a
<a class="pagenum" title="228" id="page-228"/>
wealthy old Jew say that he’d go to Germany for
diagnosis and to England for treatment, and he’d
had operations and illnesses all over the world.
That expresses it.”
</p>
<p>
“You infer that the English have more
humanity.”
</p>
<p>
“They don’t regard the patient as a case in
the way continentals do.”
</p>
<p>
“Well I guess when we’re sick we all like to
go home.”
</p>
<p>
“You mean the Jew had no home. But he
chose the English to go home to when he was ill.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s true in more senses than one. This
country’s been a home for the Jews right away
back.”
</p>
<p>
“It’s a great country. That’s sure.”
</p>
<p>
“Science has got to go away ahead. If you’re
going to be humanitarians over here you must
leave continental science out of your scheme. So
long as you carry out their results you can’t
honestly cry down their methods.”
</p>
<p>
“You must cry down their methods if you
don’t approve of them.”
</p>
<p>
“You can’t put back. You can’t prevent
association between the different lands; especially
in matters of science.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="229" id="page-229"/>
“What <em>I’m</em> saying. You’ve got to accept the
goods, even supposing your particular constitution
of mind inclines you to bulleave them ill-gotten.”
</p>
<p>
“It’s a case of good coming out of evil.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s Jesuitical, the end justifying the
means. I don’t believe that. Why should
science go ahead so fast? Where’s the hurry as
you say in Canada?”
</p>
<p>
“Well, you’ve only to look around to see that.”
</p>
<p>
“I <em>don’t</em> see it. Do you mean that people
who make scientific experiments do it because
they want to improve the world. They don’t.
It’s their curiosity.”
</p>
<p>
“Divine curiosity I’ve heard it called.”
</p>
<p>
“The divine curiosity of Eve ... that’s
the answer to the Mosaic fable about woman. She
was interested in the serpent, and polite to him
and gossiped with him. Science is scandal-mongering;
gossip about the universe. Men
talk about women gossiping. My word.”
</p>
<p>
“Stars. I’d like some of our chaps to hear you
say that.”
</p>
<p>
“It is. Darwin gossiped about monkeys and
in his old age he looked exactly like one and regretted
that he had neglected music.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="230" id="page-230"/>
“You can’t have it both ways. Each man must
pursue one line or another.”
</p>
<p>
“Poor dears yes.”
</p>
<p>
“You’re inclined to pity us all.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s English humanitarianism may be.”
</p>
<p>
“I’m not a humanitarian. I can’t bear
humanity, in the mass. I think it’s a frightful
idea.”
</p>
<p>
“A fairly solid idea.”
</p>
<p>
“I prefer ... the equator, and the moon,
and the plane of the ecliptic; I think the plane of
the ecliptic is a perfectly lovely thing.”
</p>
<p>
“It’s a scientific discovery.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes but not on the body of an animal.”
</p>
<p>
“The body of the chap who began all that had
some pretty hard sufferings.”
</p>
<p>
“Do you know the schoolboy’s definition of
the equator?”
</p>
<p>
“No, but I guess it’s a good one.”
</p>
<p>
“A menagerie lion running round the world
once in every twenty-four hours. I think it’s an
absolutely perfect idea.”
</p>
<p>
“I guess that’s good enough to stop on.”
</p>
<p>
“You off Winchester?”
</p>
<p>
In the breaking of the group Dr. von Heber
came near with his smile. Dr. Hurd was noisily
<a class="pagenum" title="231" id="page-231"/>
stretching himself, laughing and coughing. No
one was listening. They were quite alone among
their friends, his friends, Canada. This has been
a charming ending to a very lovely day he said
quietly. Miriam beamed and was silent. Did you
see the afterglow, she asked humbly. His smile
reappeared. He took in what she said, but
beamed because they were talking. She tried
to beat back her words, but they were on her
lips and she was already moving away when she
spoke. “A fine ... fuliginous ... <em>pink</em>
wasn’t it?”
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-8-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
“Where is the <em>harm</em> child, in your sitting up
at a piano, even behind a curtain; in a large
room in Gower Street, I can’t imagine why you
say <em>GOWER</em> Street; playing, with the soft
pedal either down or <em>up</em>, the kind of music that
you play so beautifully? Can you see her difficulty
Jan?”
</p>
<p>
“Not even with the most powerful of microscopes.”
</p>
<p>
Lolling on the windowsill of their lives to
glance at a passing show.... The blessed
<a class="pagenum" title="232" id="page-232"/>
damosel looked out. Leaning, heavy on the
golden balcony. <em>She</em> knew why not. Heavy
blossoming weight, weighed down with her heavy
hair, the sky blossoming in it, facing, just able to
face without sinking, the rose-gold world, blossoming
under her eyes.
</p>
<p>
Thin hard fingers of women chattering and
tweaking.... They go up sideways, witches
on broomsticks, and chatter angrily in the distance.
They cannot stop the sound of the silent
crimson blossoming roses.
</p>
<p>
“I don’t approve of séances.”
</p>
<p>
“Have you ever been to one<a id="corr-53"/>?”
</p>
<p>
“No; but I know I don’t. It was something
about the woman when she asked me.”
</p>
<p>
“That is a personal prejudice.”
</p>
<p>
“It is not a prejudice; how can it be pre after
I have seen her?”
</p>
<p>
“Séances are wrong; because you have taken
a dislike to Madame Devine.”
</p>
<p>
“It can’t be right to make half a guinea an
hour so easily. And she said a guinea for occasional
public performances.” That’s all; they
know now. I had made up my mind. I wanted
them to <em>see</em> me tempted and refusing for conscience
sake.
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="233" id="page-233"/>
“Good Lord; you’d be a millionaire in no
time; why not take it until you are a millionaire
and then if you don’t like it, chuck it?”
</p>
<p>
“I should like it all right, my part.”
</p>
<p>
“Well surely that is all that concerns you.
You have nothing whatever to do with what
goes on on the other side of the curtain. I think
if you would like the job you are a fool to hesitate,
don’t you Jan?”
</p>
<p>
“A fool there was and he made his prayer, yes
I think it is foolish to refuse such an admirable
offer.”
</p>
<p>
“A rag and a bone and a hank of hair; that
just describes Madame Devine.” That’s not
true; smooth fat thinness with dark filmy cruel
clothes that last; having supper afterwards;
but it would be true in a magazine; a weird
medium; the grocer’s wife with second sight
was fat and ordinary; a simple woman. Peter,
the rough fisherman.
</p>
<p>
“Now you are being unchristian.”
</p>
<p>
“I’m not. I love the rag and bone and hank
of hair type. Sallow. Like Mrs. Pat....
The <em>ingénue</em>. Sitting in a corner dressed in white,
reading a book. A fat pink face. You can imagine
her at forty.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="234" id="page-234"/>
“Now you are being both morbid and improper.”
</p>
<p>
“I’m not morbid. Am I, Jan?”
</p>
<p>
“No I do not call you morbid. I call Gracie
Harter-Jones morbid.”
</p>
<p>
“Who is she?”
</p>
<p>
“We met her at Mrs. Mackinley’s. She says
she is perfectly miserable unless she is in a morbid
state. She’s written a book called ‘The Purple
Shawl of Ceremony.’”
</p>
<p>
“She must be awfully clever.”
</p>
<p>
“She’s mad. She revels in being mad. Like
‘the Sun shivered. Earth from its darkest basements
rocked and quivered.’”
</p>
<p>
“Oh go I said and see the swans harping upon
the rooftops in the corn. Where is the grey
felt hat I saw go down, wrinkled and old to meet
the lily-leaf, where where my child the little
stick that crushed the wild infernal apple of the
pit where where the pearl. Snarling he cried I
will not have you bless the tropics sitting in a
sulky row nor fling your banners o’er the
stately wave; I heard shrill minstrelsies ...
that’s all awfully bad; but you can go on forever.”
</p>
<p>
“<em>I</em> couldn’t. I don’t know how you do it. I
<a class="pagenum" title="235" id="page-235"/>
think it’s awfully clever. Jan and I roared over
your Madeleine Francis Barry letter.”
</p>
<p>
“You can go on for days.”
</p>
<p>
“Barry-paroding.”
</p>
<p>
“You must not wait, nor think of words. If
you are in the mood they come more quickly than
you could speak or even think; you follow them
and the whole effect entertains you. There’s
something in it. You never know what is coming
and you swing about, as long as you keep the
rhythm, all over the world. It refreshes you.
Sometimes there are the most beautiful things.
And you see all the things so vividly.”
</p>
<p>
“She’s not morbid; she’s mad.”
</p>
<p>
“I’m neither morbid nor mad. It’s a splendid
way of amusing yourself; better than imagining
the chairs in front of you at a concert quietly
collapsing.” They were scarcely listening. Both
of them were depending on each other to listen
and answer.
</p>
<p>
“Do you still go to Ruscino’s every night
Miriam?”
</p>
<p>
“With the Spaniard? How is the Spaniard?”
</p>
<p>
“He’s eaten up with dizizz.”
</p>
<p>
“With <em>what</em>?”
</p>
<p>
“That’s what Miss Scott says.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="236" id="page-236"/>
“How does she know?”
</p>
<p>
“All the doctors are prescribing for him.”
</p>
<p>
“Did they tell her?”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t know. She just said it suddenly.
Like she says things. The doctors are all awfully
fond of him.”
</p>
<p>
“Why are they fond of him?”
</p>
<p>
“He is extraordinary. He has given up his
poster work and does lightning silhouettes, outlines
of heads, at five shillings each at some gardens
somewhere. Sometimes he makes five pounds
an evening at it.”
</p>
<p>
“So you <em>don’t</em> go to Ruscino’s every 
evening?”
</p>
<p>
“He had a few weeks of being awfully poor.
One day he had only eightpence in the world.
Of course he was having all his meals at Tansley
Street. But that evening he found out that I
had nothing at all. I had been telling him about
my meal arrangements. I always pay Mrs.
Bailey at the time for my shilling dinners and
when I can’t afford them I get a fourpenny meal
at a Y.W.C.A. He made me take his eightpence.
The next day he <em>walked</em> I found afterwards, all
the way to South Kensington in the grilling heat
to see a man about the silhouettes.”
</p>
<p>
“What a little brick.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="237" id="page-237"/>
“He is like that to everybody. And always
so....”
</p>
<p>
“So what?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, I can’t express him. But he’s a
Jew, you know, a Spanish Jew. Isn’t it extraordinary?”
</p>
<p>
“Well really Miriam I can’t see that there is
anything extraordinary about a man’s being a
Spanish Jew if he wants to?”
</p>
<p>
“I was most awfully surprised. Mrs. Bailey
told me. There is some Jewish girl he has been
meeting in Kensington; he drew her portrait, a
special one, for her father, for five guineas, and
he has engaged himself to her because he thought
she had money and now finds she has not damn
her, he said damn her to Mrs. Bailey, and that he
has been boring himself for nothing. He is going
into hospital for his gastric ulcer when the season
is over and then going to disappear. He told me
he never spoke to a woman more than twice; but
that he is willing to marry any woman with
enough money.”
</p>
<p>
“Wise man.”
</p>
<p>
“He has spoken more than twice to you.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes but I know what he means. Besides we
don’t talk, in the society way.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="238" id="page-238"/>
“How <em>do</em> you talk?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, I don’t know. I air my theories sometimes.
He always disagrees. Once he told me suddenly
it was very bad for me to go about with him.”
</p>
<p>
“But you go.”
</p>
<p>
“Of course I do.” The untold scenes were
standing in the way. There was no way of telling
them.... Tansley Street life was more and
more unreal to them the deeper it grew. It was
unreal to them because things were kept back.
They were still interested in stories of Wimpole
Street, but even there now they only glanced in
passing, their thoughts busy in the shared life
they perpetually jested over. They listened with
reservations; not always believing; sitting in
dressing-gowns believing or not as they chose;
because one knew one had lost touch and tried to
make things interesting to get back into the old
glow....
</p>
<p>
“How did the dinner-party go off?”
</p>
<p>
“Beautifully.”
</p>
<p>
“Did you talk German?”
</p>
<p>
“There was no need; the man talked better
English than anybody.”
</p>
<p>
“Why did it go off beautifully? Tell us about
the beautiful things.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="239" id="page-239"/>
The strange silent twilight, the reassuring
shyness of all the guests; no attempt to talk
about anything in particular; cool hard face
and upright coldly jewelled body; the sense of
success with each simple remark. The evening of
music. Life-marked people; their marks showing
without pain, covered, half-healed by the hours
of kindness.
</p>
<p>
“It’s something in the Orlys.”
</p>
<p>
“What do you think it is?”
</p>
<p>
“It’s something frightfully beautiful.”
</p>
<p>
“They are very nice people.”
</p>
<p>
“That doesn’t mean anything at all.”
</p>
<p>
“The secret of beauty is colour and texture.
The ointment will preserve the colour and the
texture of your skin—in any climate. Read
her the piece about the movement of the hands
over a tea-tray.... In pouring out tea
never allow the hands to fall slack, or below the
level of the tray. Keep them well in view, moving
deftly among the articles on the tray; sitting
well back on the seat of the chair the body
upright and a little inclined forward from the
hips—see Chap.: III. “How to Sit”—so
that the movements of the wrist and hands are in
easy harmony with the whole body. Restrain
<a class="pagenum" title="240" id="page-240"/>
the hands. Do not let the fingers splay out.
Do not cramp them or allow any effort to
appear in the movement of any part of the
hand.”
</p>
<p>
“Good heavens. Can’t you <em>see</em> those women.
But that must be by an American.”
</p>
<p>
“Why an American?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh. I don’t know. You can tell. Are you
going to try all these things?”
</p>
<p>
“Rather. We’re going in heavily for beauty
culture.”
</p>
<p>
“We are going to skip, and have Turkish baths,
and steam our faces.”
</p>
<p>
“I suppose one ought.”
</p>
<p>
“I think so. I don’t see why one should look
old before one’s time. One’s life is ageing and
ravaging. After a Turkish bath one feels like a
new-born babe.”
</p>
<p>
“But it would take all one’s time and money.”
</p>
<p>
“Even so. It restores your self-respect to
feel perfectly groomed and therefore perfectly
self-possessed. It makes the office respect
you.”
</p>
<p>
“I know. I hate the grubbiness of 
snipe-life—sometimes.”
</p>
<p>
“Only sometimes?”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="241" id="page-241"/>
“Well, I forget about it. If I didn’t I should
go mad of grit and dust.”
</p>
<p>
“We <em>are</em> mad of grit and dust. That’s why we
think it’s time to do something.”
</p>
<p>
“H’m.”
</p>
<p>
“You really like the Orlys, don’t you?”
</p>
<p>
“You can’t like everybody at once. You have
to <a id="corr-56"/>choose. That’s the trouble. If you are 
liking
one set of people very much you get out of touch
with the others.”
</p>
<p>
“You have so many sets of people.”
</p>
<p>
“I haven’t. I hardly know anybody.”
</p>
<p>
“You have hosts of friends.”
</p>
<p>
“I haven’t. In the way you mean. I expect
I give you wrong impressions.”
</p>
<p>
“Well I think you’ve a capacity—Don’t you
think she has a capacity—von Bohlen?”
</p>
<p>
“She has some very nice friends and some
extraordinary ones.”
</p>
<p>
“Like the Flat.”
</p>
<p>
“How is the Flat?”
</p>
<p>
“Is she still living on a hard-boiled egg and a
bottle of stout?”
</p>
<p>
“And sending notes?”
</p>
<p>
“Come round at once my state of mind is
awful?”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="242" id="page-242"/>
“She’s moved. I forgot to tell you. She
came to tell me. She stood on the landing and
said she had taken up journalism. Writing articles,
for The Taper. Isn’t it wonderful?”
</p>
<p>
“Isn’t <em>what</em> wonderful?”
</p>
<p>
“Suddenly being able to write articles. She’s
met some people called occultists and says she has
never been so happy in her life.”... Are
you going to say anything ... why do you
not think it wonderful<a id="corr-57"/>?...
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-8-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
Miriam flung down Tansley Street telling her
news. Her conflict with the June dust and heat
of the Euston Road had made her forget it. Back
in her own world it leapt at her from every sunlit
paving stone; drawing her on almost at a run.
There was enough to carry her leaping steps right
down through London, to the edge of some unfamiliar
part and back again, but her room called
her; she would go in and up to it and come out
again.
</p>
<p>
... <em>hopeless</em> impossibility ... good
<em>reliable</em> Budge-Whitlock at fifteen. You won’t
get a Primus under twenty-five. Those other
<a class="pagenum" title="243" id="page-243"/>
makes are not made to last; giving way inside
somewhere where you could not see, suddenly;
in the midst of the traffic; the man’s new bicycle,
coming in <em>two</em>, in Cheapside ... smiling, I’ve
got a message for you from Winthrop; well that’s
not strictly true. The fact is he wants to advance
the money without your knowing it; commissioned
me to see what I can do. You needn’t
hesitate; he’s got plenty of spare cash. I’ll buy
the machine and you’ll owe the price to me. Kind
kind Winthrop, talking in the workshop. It’s a
ph-pity she shouldn’t av a ph-ph-machine if she
wants one without waiting t-ph save up frit....
I say Miss Henderson here’s a chance for you;
new machine going half-price. No bunkum. It’s
Lady Slater’s. She’s off to India. I’ll overhaul
it for you. Pay as you like, through her steward.
My advice is you close. You won’t get a better
chance ... reaping the benefit of Mr. Leyton’s
eternal talk about bicycling ... no trouble;
overhauled and reliable; coming out of space.
</p>
<p>
... Lifted off the earth, sitting at rest
in the moving air, the London air turning into
fresh moving air flowing through your head, the
green squares and high houses moving, sheering
smoothly along, sailing towards you changed,
<a class="pagenum" title="244" id="page-244"/>
upright and alive, moving by, speaking, telescoping
away behind unforgotten, still visible,
staying in your forward-looking eyes, being added
to in unbroken movement, a whole, moving
silently to the sound of firm white tyres circling
on smooth wood, echoing through endless future
to the riding ring of the little bell, ground easily
out by firm new cogs.... <em>Country</em> roads flowing
by in sun and shadow; the ring of the bell
making the hedges brilliant at empty turnings
... all there in your mind with dew and
freshness as you threaded round and round and
in and out of the maze of squares in evening light;
consuming the evening time but leaving you careless
and strong; even with the bad loose hired
machine.
</p>
<p>
She let herself in and swept into the dining-room
taking in while she said eagerly, crossing the
room I’ve bought a machine. A Wolverhampton
Humber. With Beeston tyres. B.S.A. fittings.
Ball Bearings ... the doctors grouped about
the mantelpiece. They gathered round her.
She was going backwards; through a scene she
recognised; in a dream. Dr. von Heber’s
welcoming smile stood at the end of it. They
could not be there idle at that time of day, she
<a class="pagenum" title="245" id="page-245"/>
assured herself as she talked. She knew they were
there before she came in, without even thinking
of them. She sat down in their midst confidently
saying the phrases of the scene as they came towards
her, backwards unfolding. The doctors
went back with her, brothers, supporting and
following. Her bicycle led the way. Their
bright world had made it for her.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
They had seen the English country with her.
It was more alive to them. They would remember.
Dr. von Heber was taking it in, with his
best ruminating smile, as a personal possession;
seeing it with English eyes. Her last year’s ride
through the counties was shared now. It would
go to Canada.
</p>
<p>
“It’s coming all the way from <em>Bakewell</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“Where will that place be?”
</p>
<p>
“Oh I don’t know; somewhere; in the north
I think. Yorkshire. No, the Peak. The Peak
district. Peak Freane. They bake splendidly.
The further north you get the better they bake.”
The scene was swaying forward into newness.
Dr. Winchester suddenly began talking about the
historical interest of the neighbourhood. They
had all been down to look at the Old Curiosity
<a class="pagenum" title="246" id="page-246"/>
Shop ... there was something about it ... and
there was a better local story of their kind.
She told Mr. Leyton’s story of the passage in
Little Gower Place, body snatchers carrying
newly buried bodies through it by night from
St. Pancras churchyard to the hospital.
</p>
<p>
“You don’t say so. To think we’ve gone
along there this while and not known.”
</p>
<p>
“That shop in Lincoln’s Inn isn’t the shop
Dickens meant. It’s been pulled down. It’s
only the site. Some people think Dickens is
sentimental.”
</p>
<p>
“Those who think so are hyper-critical. Besides
being sentimental don’t prevent him being
one of your very greatest men.”
</p>
<p>
“<em>You</em> should appreciate him highly. If ever
there was any man revealed abuses.... You
ought to read our Holmes’ Elsie Venner—We
call it his medicated novel over at home” smiled
Dr. von Heber. He was speaking low, making a
separate conversation. The others were talking
together.
</p>
<p>
“Yes,” murmured Miriam. “I must.” They
both smiled a wide agreement. “I’ve got it
over at home” murmured Dr. von Heber his
smile deepening forwards. You shall read it
<a class="pagenum" title="247" id="page-247"/>
when you come. <em>We’ll</em> read it, he <a id="corr-58"/>said smiling to
himself. She tried to stay where he was, not to
be distracted by her thoughts. It must be
Holmes’ worst book. A book written on purpose,
to prove something.
</p>
<p>
“Didactic” she said with helpless suddenness,
“but I like Holmes’ breakfast books.”
</p>
<p>
“You’ve read those?”
</p>
<p>
“Yes” said Miriam wearily. He had caught
something from her thoughts. She saw him
looking smaller, confined to the passing English
present, a passing moment in his determined
Canadian life. His strong unconsidered opinions
held him through it and would receive and engulf
him forever when he went back. Perhaps he
had not noticed her thoughts. Well I must
bid you a welcome adoo she said getting up
to go.
</p>
<p>
“Now <em>where</em>” he smiled rising, and surrounding
her with his smile, “where did you discover
Artemus <em>Ward</em>?”
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-9">
<a class="pagenum" title="248" id="page-248"/>
CHAPTER IX
</h2>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-9-1">
1
</h3>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">I</span><span class="postfirstchar">t</span> 
was Mrs. Bailey coming up the top flight
clearing her throat. Tapping at the door.
</p>
<p>
“Ah. I thought the young lady was in. I
<em>thought</em> so.” Mrs. Bailey stood approving inside
the door. The sunlight streamed on to her
shabby skirt. The large dusty house, the many
downstair rooms, the mysterious dark-roomed
vault of the basement, all upright in her upright
form; hurried smeary cleansings, swift straightening
of grey-sheeted beds, the strange unfailing
water-system, gurgling cisterns, gushing taps and
lavatory flushes, the wonder of gaslight and bedroom
candles, the daily meals magically appearing
and disappearing; her knowledge of the various
mysteriously arriving and vanishing people, all
beginning and ending in her triumphant, reassuring
smile that went forward outside beyond
these things, with everybody.
</p>
<p>
Now that she was there, bearing and banishing
all these heavy things, the squat green teapot
<a class="pagenum" title="249" id="page-249"/>
on the table in the blaze of window-light, the
Chinese lantern hanging from the hook in the
ceiling, the little Madras muslin curtains at
either end of the endmost lattices made a picture
and set the room free from the challenge of the
house accumulating as Miriam had come up
through it and preventing the effect she had
sought when she put out the green teapot on the
sunlit table. She was receiving Mrs. Bailey as
a guest, backed up by the summery little window-room.
She stood back in the gloom, dropping
back into the green lamplit stillness of the farm-house
garden. The Song of Hiawatha sounded
on and on amongst the trees, the trunk of the huge
sheltering oak lit brightly by the shaded lamp on
the little garden table, the forms in the long
chairs scarcely visible. She offered Mrs. Bailey
the joy of her journey down, her bicycle in the
van, Miss Szigmondy’s London guests, the
sixteenth-century ingle, the pine-scented bedrooms
with sloping floors, the sandy high-banked
lanes and pine-clad hills, the strange talk with the
connoisseur, the kind stupid boyish mind of the
London doctor who had <em>seen</em> myopic astigmatism
across the lunch table and admitted being beaten
in argument without resentment; the long dewy
<a class="pagenum" title="250" id="page-250"/>
morning ride to Guildford; the happy thorns in
her hands keeping the week-end still going on at
Wimpole Street; her renewed sense of the simplicity
of imposing looking people, their personal
helplessness on the surface of wealthy social life;
the glow of wealthy social life lighting the little
wooden window-room, gleaming from the sheeny
flecks of light on the well-shaped green teapot.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Bailey advanced to the middle of the floor
and stood looking towards the window. My word
aren’t we <em>smart</em> she breathed.
</p>
<p>
“I like the teapot and the lantern, don’t you?”
said Miriam.
</p>
<p>
“Very pretty, mts, very pretty, young lady.”
</p>
<p>
“It reminds me of week-ends. It <em>is</em> a week-end.
That is my drawing-room.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s it. It’s a week-end,” beamed Mrs.
Bailey. But she had come for something. The
effect was not spoiled by giving a wrong, <em>social</em>
impression of it, because Mrs. Bailey was busily
thinking behind her voice. When she had gone
the silent effect would be there, more strongly.
Perhaps she had some new suggestion to make
about Sissie.
</p>
<p>
“Well, young lady, I want to talk to you.”
Mrs. Bailey propped one elbow on the mantelpiece
<a class="pagenum" title="251" id="page-251"/>
and brushed at her <a id="corr-62"/>skirt. Miriam waited,
watching her impatiently. The Tansley Street
life was fading into the glow of the oncoming
holiday season. Rain was cooling the
July weather, skirmishy sunlit April rain and wind
drawing her forward. There was leisure in cool
uncrowded streets and restaurants and in the two
cool houses, no pressure of work, the gay easy
August that was almost as good as a holiday, and
the certainty beyond the rain, of September
brilliance.
</p>
<p>
“Well you know I’ve a great regard for <a id="corr-63"/>you,
young lady.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam stared back at the long row of interviews
with Mrs. Bailey and sought her face for
her invisible thoughts.
</p>
<p>
“Well to come straight to the point without
beating about the bush, it’s about him, that little
man, you know who I mean.”
</p>
<p>
“Who?”
</p>
<p>
“Mendizzable.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam’s interest awoke and flared. That
past patch of happy life had been somehow or
other visible to Mrs. Bailey. She felt decorated
and smiled into the room.
</p>
<p>
“Well; you know I don’t believe in talk going
<a class="pagenum" title="252" id="page-252"/>
about from one to another. In <em>my</em> opinion
people should mind their own business and not
listen to tittle-tattle, or if they do, keep it to
themselves without passing it on and making
mischief.”
</p>
<p>
“Has someone been trying to make mischief
about poor little Mr. Mendizabal?”
</p>
<p>
“Well, if it was about him I wouldn’t mind so
much. Little villain. That’s my name for him.”
</p>
<p>
“Fascinating little villain if he must be called
a villain.”
</p>
<p>
“Well; that’s what I’ve got to ask you my
chahld; are you under a fascination about him?
You’ll excuse me asking such a question.”
</p>
<p>
Solicitude! <em>what</em> for?
</p>
<p>
“Well. I <em>did</em> think him fascinating; he
fascinated me, he would anybody. He would
fascinate Miss <em>Scott</em> if he chose.”
</p>
<p>
“’Er? ’Er be fascinated by anybody? She
thinks too much of number one for that.”
</p>
<p>
... Miss Scott. Dressing so carefully,
so full of independent talk and laughter and not
able to be fascinated ... too far-seeing to
be fascinated.
</p>
<p>
“But why do you ask? I’m not responsible for
Mr. Mendizabal’s being a fascinating little man.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="253" id="page-253"/>
“Fascinating little <em>devil</em>. You should have
heard Dr. Winchester.”
</p>
<p>
Something hidden; all the time; behind
the politeness of the house.
</p>
<p>
“Dr. <em>Win</em>chester?”
</p>
<p>
“Dr. Winchester. Do you remember him
coming out into the hall one evening when you
were brushing your coat?”
</p>
<p>
“And brushing it for me. Yes.”
</p>
<p>
“He didn’t know how to let you go.” There
was a trembling in Mrs. Bailey’s voice. “He
said,” she pursued breathlessly, “he was in two
minds to come with you himself.”
</p>
<p>
“<em>Where? Why?</em>”
</p>
<p>
“Why? He <em>knew</em> that fella was waiting for
you round the corner.”
</p>
<p>
Suddenly appearing, brushing so carefully
... why not have spoken and come.
</p>
<p>
“Well now we’re coming to it. I can’t tell
you how it all happened, that’s between Mr.
Gunner and Miss S. They got to know you was
going out with Mendizzable and where you went.
It’s contemptible I know, if you like, but there’s
many such people about.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam checked her astonishment, making a
mental note for future contemplation of the
<a class="pagenum" title="254" id="page-254"/>
spectacle of Mr. Gunner, or Miss Scott, following
her to Ruscino’s. They had told Mrs. Bailey and
talked to the doctors.... Spies; talking idle;
maliciously picking over her secret life.
</p>
<p>
“Dr. Winchester said he was worried half out
of his senses about you.”
</p>
<p>
“Why not have said so?”
</p>
<p>
“You may be wondering,” Mrs. Bailey flushed
a girlish pink, “why I come up to-day telling
you all this. That’s just what <em>I</em> say. That’s just
the worst of it. He never breathed a word to me
till he went.”
</p>
<p>
Dr. Winchester <em>gone</em> ... the others gone
... of <em>course</em>. Next week would be August.
They had all vanished away; out of the house,
back to Canada. Dr. von Heber gone without a
word. Perhaps <em>he</em> had been worried. They <em>all</em>
had. That was why they had all been so nice
and surrounding.... That was the explanation
of everything.... They were brothers.
Jealous brothers. The first she had had. This
was the sort of thing girls had who had brothers.
Cheek. If only she had known and shown them
how silly they were.
</p>
<p>
“Lawk. I wish to goodness he’d come straight
to me at once.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="255" id="page-255"/>
“Well. It’s awfully sweet of them from their
point of view. They were such <em>awfully</em> nice
little men in their way.”... <em>Why</em> didn’t
they come to me, instead of all this talk? They
knew me well enough. All those long talks at
night. And all the time they were seeing a foolish
girl fascinated by a disreputable foreigner. How
dare they?
</p>
<p>
“That’s what I say. I can’t forgive him for
that. They’re all alike. Selfish.”
</p>
<p>
“All old men like Dr. Winchester are selfish.
Selfish and weak. They get to think of nothing
but their comforts. And keep out of everything
by talk.”
</p>
<p>
“It’s not him I mean. It’s the other one.”
</p>
<p>
“Which?” What was Mrs. Bailey going to
say? What? Miriam gazed angrily.
</p>
<p>
“That’s what I must tell you. That’s why I
asked you if you was under a fascination.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh well, they’ve gone. What does it matter?”
</p>
<p>
“I feel I ought to tell you. He, von Heber,
had made up his mind to <em>speak</em>. He was one in a
thousand, Winchester said. She’s lost von Heber
he said. He thought the <em>world</em> of her, ’e sez,”
gasped Mrs. Bailey. “My <em>word</em>, I wish I’d
known what was going on.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="256" id="page-256"/>
Miriam flinched. Mrs. Bailey must be made
to go now.
</p>
<p>
“Oh really,” she said in trembling tones. “He
was an awfully nice man.”
</p>
<p>
“My word. Isn’t it a pity,” said Mrs. Bailey
with tears in her eyes. “It worries me something
shocking.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh well, if he was so stupid.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, you can’t blame him after what
Mendizzable <em>said</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“You haven’t told me.”
</p>
<p>
“He said he’d only to raise his finger. Oh
Lawk. Well there you are, now you’ve got it all.”
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Bailey <em>must</em> go. Mr. Mendizabal’s mind
was a French novel. He’d said French thoughts in
English to the doctors. They had believed. Even
Canadian men can have French minds.
</p>
<p>
“Yes. Well I see it all now. Mr. Mendizabal’s
vanity is his own affair.... I’m sure
I hope they’ve all had an interesting summer.
I’m awfully glad you’ve told me. It’s most
interesting.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, I felt it was my duty to come up and
tell you. I felt you ought to know.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes ... I’m awfully glad you’ve told me.
It’s like, er, a storm in a teacup.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="257" id="page-257"/>
“It’s not them I’m thinking of. Lot of low-minded
gossips. That’s my opinion. It’s the
harm they do I’m thinking of.”
</p>
<p>
“They can’t do any harm. As for the doctors
they’re quite able to take care of themselves.”
Miriam moved impatiently about the room.
But she could not let herself look at her thoughts
with Mrs. Bailey there.
</p>
<p>
“Well young lady,” murmured Mrs. Bailey
dolorously at last, “I felt I couldn’t do less than
come up, for my <em>own</em> satisfaction.”
</p>
<p>
She thinks I have made a scandal, without
consulting her ... her mind flew, flaming, over
the gossiping household, over Mrs. Bailey’s
thoughts as she pondered the evidence. Wrenching
away from the spectacle she entrenched
herself far off; clutching out towards the oblivion
of the coming holidays; a clamour came up from
the street, the swaying tumult of a fire-engine,
the thunder of galloping horses, the hoarse shouts
of the firemen; the outside life to which she
went indifferent to any grouped faces <a id="corr-64"/>either
of approval or of condemnation.
</p>
<p>
“I’m awfully sorry you’ve had all this, Mrs.
Bailey.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh that’s nothing. It’s not that I think of.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="258" id="page-258"/>
“Don’t think about anything. It doesn’t
matter.”
</p>
<p>
“Well I’ve got it off my mind now I’ve spoken.”
</p>
<p>
“It <em>is</em> abominable isn’t it. Never mind. I
don’t care. People are perfectly welcome to
talk about me if it gives them any satisfaction.”
</p>
<p>
“That is so. It’s von Heber I’m so mad
about.”
</p>
<p>
“They’re all alike as you say.”
</p>
<p>
“He might have given you a chance.”
</p>
<p>
Dr. von <em>Heber</em>; suddenly nearer than anyone.
Her own man. By his own conviction. Found
away here, at Mrs. Bailey’s; Mrs. Bailey’s
regret measuring his absolute genuineness. Gone
away....
</p>
<p>
She steadied herself to say “Oh, if he’s selfish.”
</p>
<p>
“They’re all that, every one of them. But
we’ve all got to settle in life, sooner or later.”
</p>
<p>
That was all, for Mrs. Bailey. She rallied
woefully in the thought that Mrs. Bailey knew
she could have settled in life if she had chosen.
</p>
<p>
Flickering faintly far away was something to
be found behind all this, some silent thing she
would find by herself if only Mrs. Bailey would go.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
<em>Fascinated.</em> How did they find the word?
<a class="pagenum" title="259" id="page-259"/>
It was true; and false. This was the way people
talked. These were the true-false phrases used
to sum up things for which there were no words.
</p>
<p>
They had no time. They were too busy.
That was in the scheme. They were somehow
prevented from doing anything. Dr. von Heber
had been saved. The fascinating eyes and snorting
smile had saved him; coming out of space
to tell him she was a flirt. He had boasted. She
adore me; hah! I tell you she adore me, he
would say. It was history repeating itself. Max
and Ted. Again after all these years. A <em>Jew</em>.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-9-2">
2
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
The unconscious, inexorable ship ...
gliding across the Atlantic. They would take up
their bright Canadian life again. England, a
silent picture, fading.... Dear Dr. von
Heber. I owe it to myself just to inform you
that the legend you heard about me was untrue.
Wishing you a happy and prosperous career
yours truly. That would be saying I, fool,
have discovered too late that I was not clever
enough to let you imagine that you were the only
kind of man in the world ... discreet women
are sly. To get on in the world it is necessary to
<a class="pagenum" title="260" id="page-260"/>
be sly. Von Heber is sly. Careful and prudent
and sly. What did genius Wayneflete think?
Genius understands everything. Discreet proper
clever women are open books to him. He will
never marry. Whimsical old failure, Winchester,
disappearing into British Columbia; failure;
decorated in his evening conversations by having
been to England.... My dear von Heber,
what the devil do you mean? When will you
meet me? Choose your own weapons ...
that would be admitting not having the right to
be as free and indiscreet as one <a id="corr-65"/>chooses ...
“a woman must march with her regiment; if
she is wise she does”; something like that. If a
woman is <em>sly</em> she marches with her regiment
... all in agreement, being sly and discreet,
helping each other. What for? What was the
plot for? ... there’s a <em>word</em> ... <em>coercion</em>,
that’s the word. Better any sort of free life.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
If he could have <em>seen</em>. But then he would have
seen those other moments too. Von Heber.
Power and success. Never any moments like that.
Divided life all the time <em>always</em>. So much for
his profession, so much for her, outside it with the
regiment of women. Proper men can’t bring the
<a class="pagenum" title="261" id="page-261"/>
wild, gleaming ... channel of flowers,
pulling dragging to fling yourself headlong down
it and awake, dead. Dead if you do. Dead if
you don’t. Now Tomlinson gave up the ghost.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-9-3">
3
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
“You’re just in time.” They had come back?
He had come back for something?
</p>
<p>
“There’s a surprise waiting for you upstairs”;
<em>what</em> surprise Mrs. Bailey; how can you be happy
and mysterious; cajoling to rush on into nothing,
sweeping on, talking; “a friend of yorse; Dr.
Winchester’s room; she’s longing to see you.”
</p>
<p>
“Good heavens.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam fled upstairs and tapped at the door
of the room below her own. A smooth fluting
thoughtful voice answered tranquilly from within
the spaces of the room behind the closed door.
There was no one with a voice like that to speak to
intimately. It was a stranger, someone she had
met somewhere and given the address to; a
superior worldly person serenely answering the
knock of a housemaid. She went in. Tall figure,
tall skirt and blouse standing at the dressing-table.
<a class="pagenum" title="262" id="page-262"/>
The grime-screened saffron light fell on
white hands pinning a skein of bright gold hair
round the back of a small head. How do
you do, Miriam announced, coming forward
with obedient reluctance. The figure turned; a
bent flushed face laughed from tumbled hair.
</p>
<p>
“’Ere I am dear; turned up like a bad penny.
I’ll shake ’ands in a minute.” With compressed
lips and bent frowning brow Miss Dear went on
busily pinning. “Bother my silly hair,” she went
on with deepening flush, “I shall be able to talk
to you in a minute.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam clutched at the amazed resentment that
flamed from her up and down the sudden calm
unconscious facade reared between her and the
demolished house, spread across the very room
that had held the key to its destruction. She
fought for annihilating words, but her voice had
spoken ahead of her.
</p>
<p>
“<em>El</em>eanor!”
</p>
<p>
With the word a soft beauty ran flickering, an
edge of light about the form searched by her
gazing eyes. Their shared past flowed in the
room ... the skirt was a shabby thin blue
serge, rubbed shiny, the skimpy cotton blouse had
an ugly greyish stripe and badly cut shoulders,
<a class="pagenum" title="263" id="page-263"/>
one and eleven at an awful shop, but she was just
going to speak.
</p>
<p>
“There that’s better,” she said lowering her
hands to tweak at the blouse, her blue eyes set
judiciously on the face of the important Duchesse
mirror, her passing servant. “’Ow <em>are</em> you,
dear?”
</p>
<p>
“<em>I’m</em> all right;” thrilled Miriam, 
“you’re
just in time for dinner.”
</p>
<p>
“I am afraid I don’t look very <em>din</em>nery,”
frowned Miss Dear, fingering the loose unshapely
collar of her blouse. “I wonder if you could let
me have a tie, just for to-day, dear.”
</p>
<p>
“I’ve got a lace one, but it’s crumply,”
hazarded Miriam.
</p>
<p>
“I can manage it I daresay if you’d let me
avit.”
</p>
<p>
The gong sounded. “I shan’t be a second,”
Miriam promised and fled. The little stair-flight
and her landing, the sunset gilded spaces of her
room flung her song out into the world. The tie
was worse than she had thought, its middle
length crushed and grubby. She hesitated over a
card of small pearl-headed lace pins, newly bought
and forgotten. For fourpence three farthings
the twelve smooth filmy pearl heads, their bright
<a class="pagenum" title="264" id="page-264"/>
sharp-pointed gilt shanks pinned in a perfect even
row through the neat oblong of the sheeny
glazed card, lit up her drawer, bringing back the
lace-hung aisles of the west-end shop, its counters
spread with the fascinating details of the worldly
life. The pins were the forefront of her armoury,
still too blissfully new to be used.... However
Eleanor arranged the tie she could not use
more than three.
</p>
<p>
“Thank you dear,” she said indifferently, as if
they were her own things obligingly brought in,
and swiftly pinned one end of the unexamined tie
to her blouse collar. With lifted chin she deftly
bound the lace round and round close to her
neck each swathe firmly pinned, making a column
wider than the width of the lace. Above her
blouse, transformed by the disappearance of its
ugly collar, her graceful neck went up, a column
of filmy lace. Miriam watched, learning and
amazed.
</p>
<p>
“That’s better than nothing anyhow,” said
Miss Dear from her sideways movements of
contemplation. Three or four small pearly heads
gleamed mistily from the shapely column of lace.
The glazed card lay on the dressing-table
crumpled and rent and empty of all its pins.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-9-4">
<a class="pagenum" title="265" id="page-265"/>
4
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
The dining-room was a buzz of conversation.
The table was packed save for two chairs on Mrs.
Bailey’s right hand. <em>Mrs. Bailey</em> was wearing a
<em>black satin blouse</em> cut in a V and a piece of black
ribbon-velvet tied round her neck! She was in
conversation, preening and arching as she ladled
out the soup, with a little <em>lady</em> and a big old
<em>gentleman</em> with a patriarch beard sitting on her
right bowing and smiling, personally, towards
Miriam and Miss Dear as they took their seats.
Miriam bowed and gazed as they went on talking.
The old gentleman had a large oblong head above
a large expensive spread of smooth well-cut black
coat; a huge figure, sitting tall, with easily
moving head reared high, massy grey hair; unspectacled
smiling glistening eyes and oblong
fresh cheeked face wreathed in smiles revealing
gleaming squares of gold stopping in his front
teeth. His voice was vast and silky, like the beard
that moved as he spoke, shifting about on the
serviette tucked by one corner into his neck.
His little wife was like a kind bird, soft curtains
of greying black hair crimping down from a
beautifully twisted top-knot on either side of a
<a class="pagenum" title="266" id="page-266"/>
clear gentle forehead. Softly gleaming eyes
shone through rimless pince-nez perched delicately
on her delicate nose, no ugly straight bar,
a little half-hoop to join them together and at the
side a delicate gold chain tucked over one ear
... she was about as old as mother had been
... she was exactly like her ... girlishly
young, but untroubled; the little white
ringed left hand with strange unfamiliarly expressive
finger-tips and curiously mobile turned-back
thumb-tip was herself in miniature. It held a
little piece of bread, peaked, expressively, as she
ate her soup. She was utterly familiar, no stranger;
always known. Miriam adored, seeking her eyes
till she looked, and meeting a gentle enveloping
welcome, making no break in her continuous soft
animation. The only strange thing was a curious
<em>circular</em> sweep of her delicate jaw as she spoke;
a sort of wide mouthing on some of her many
quiet words, thrown in through and between and
together with the louder easily audible silky tones
of her husband. Mrs. Bailey sat unafraid,
expanding in happiness. You <em>will</em> have a number
of things to see she was saying. We are counting
on this laddie to be our guide, said the old gentleman
turning hugely to his further neighbour.
<a class="pagenum" title="267" id="page-267"/>
Miriam’s eyes followed and met the face of Dr.
<em>Hurd</em> ... <em>grinning</em>; his intensest brick-red
grin. He had not gone! These were his <em>parents</em>.
<em>He</em> needs a holiday too, the dear lad, said the old
gentleman laying a hand on his shoulder. Dr.
Hurd grinned a rueful disclaimer with his eyes
still on Miriam’s and said I shan’t be sorry, his
face crinkling with his unexploded hysterically
leaping laugh. Mrs. Hurd’s smiling little face
flickered with quickly smothered sadness. They
had come all the way from Canada to share his
triumph and were here smoothing his defeat.... Canadian old people. A 
<em>Canadian</em>
woman ... that circular jaw movement was
made by the Canadian vowels. They disturbed a
woman’s small mouth more than a man’s. It
must affect her thoughts, the held-open mouth;
<em>airing</em> them; making them <em>circular</em>, sympathetically
balanced, easier to go on from than the
more narrowly mouthed English speech....
Mr. Gunner, sitting beside your son is a violinist.... Ah. We shall 
hope 
to hear him. Mr.
Gunner, small and shyly smiling, next to him an
<em>enormous</em> woman with a large school-girl face,
fair straight and school-girl hair lifted in a flat
wave from her broad forehead into an angry peak,
<a class="pagenum" title="268" id="page-268"/>
angrily eating with quickly moving brawny arms
coming out of elbow sleeves with cheap cream
lace frilling, reluctantly forced to flop against the
brawny arms. Sallow good-looking husband,
olive, furious, cocksure, bilious type, clubby and
knowing, flat ignorance on the top of his unconscious
shiny round black skull, both snatching
at scraps of Scott and Sissie and Gunner chaff,
trying to smile their way in to hide their fury
with each other. Too poor to get further away
from each other, accustomed to boarding house
life, eating rapidly and looking for more. She
had several brothers; a short aristocratic upper
lip and shapely scornful nostrils, brothers in the
diplomatic service or the army. There was
someone this side of the table they recognised as
different and were watching; a tall man beyond
Mrs. Barrow, a strange <em>fine</em> voice with wandering
protesting inflections; speaking out into the
world, with practised polished wandering inflections,
like a tired pebble worn by the sea,
going on and on, presenting the same worn
wandering curves wherever it was, always a
stranger everywhere, always anew presenting the
strange wandering inflections; indiscriminately.
That end of the table was not aware of the Hurds.
<a class="pagenum" title="269" id="page-269"/>
Its group was wandering outside the warm glow
of Canadian society. Eleanor Dear was feeling at
its doors, pathetic-looking with delicate appealing
head and thoughtful baby brow downcast. Us’ll
wander out this evening shall us, murmured
Miriam in a lover-like undertone. It was a
grimace at the wide-open door of Canadian life;
an ironic kick à la Harriet. Her heart beat
recklessly round the certainty of writing and
posting her letter. If he cared he would understand.
Mrs. Hurd had come to show her Canadian
society, brushing away the tangles and
stains of accidental contacts; putting everything
right. Of course we will, bridled Miss Dear
rebuking her vulgarity. Nothing mattered now
but filling up the time.
</p>
<p>
The table was breaking up; the Hurds retiring
in a backward-turning group talking to Mrs.
Bailey, towards the door. The others were
standing about the room. The Hurds had gone.
<em>Oh</em>-no, <em>that’s</em> all right, Mrs. Bailey; 
<em>I’ll</em> be
all right. It was the wandering voice.... It
went on, up and down, the most curious different
singing tones, the sentences beginning high and
dropping low and ending on an even middle tone
that sounded as if it were going on. It had a
<a class="pagenum" title="270" id="page-270"/>
meaning without the meaning of the words.
Mrs. Bailey went on with some explanation and
again the voice sent out its singing shape; up and
down and ending on a waiting tone. Miriam
looked at the speaker; a tall grey clad man, a thin
pale absent-minded face, standing towards Mrs.
Bailey, in a drooping lounge, giving her all his
attention, several people were drifting out of the
room, down-bent towards her small form;
Eleanor Dear was waiting, sitting docile, making
no suggestion, just right, like a sister; but his
eyes never met Mrs. Bailey’s; they were fixed,
burning, on something far away; his thoughts
were far away, on something that never moved.
There was a loud rat-tat on the front door, more
than a telegram and less than a caller; a claim,
familiar and peremptory. Mrs. Bailey looked
sharply up. Sissie was ambling hurriedly out of
the room. Oh <em>dear</em>, chirruped Eleanor softly,
<em>some</em>one wants to come in. Well; I’ll say goodnight,
said the grey figure and turned easily with
a curious waiting halting lounge, exactly like the
voice, towards the door. It could stop easily, if
anyone were coming in, and wander on again in
an unbroken movement. The grey shoulders
passing out through the door with the gaslight
<a class="pagenum" title="271" id="page-271"/>
on them had no look of going out of the room,
desolate, they looked <em>desolate</em>. The room was
almost empty. Mrs. Bailey was listening undisguisedly
towards the hall. Sissie came in
looking watchfully about. It’s Mr. Rodkin,
mother dear she said sullenly. <em>Rod</em>kin? <em>’Im?</em>
gasped Mrs. Bailey, transfigured. Can I come in?
asked a deep hollow insinuating voice at the door,
how do you do Mrs. Bailey? Mrs. Bailey had
flung the door wide and was laughing and shaking
hands heartily up and down with a small swarthy
black moustached little man with an armful of
newspapers and a top hat pushed back on his head.
<em>Well</em>, he said uncovering a small bony sleek
black head and sliding into a chair, his hat sticking
out from the hand of the arm clasping the great
bundle of newspapers. How <em>grand</em> you are. Moy
word. What’s the meaning of it? His teeth
gleamed brilliantly. He had small high prominent
cheek-bones, yellow beaten-in temples and a
yellow hollow face; yet something almost
dimpling about his smile. Aren’t we? chuckled
Mrs. Bailey taking his hat. Mr. Rodkin drew his
hand over his face, yawning Well I’ve been <em>every</em>where
since I left; <em>Mos</em>cow, <em>Pe</em>tersburg, Ba<em>toom</em>,
Harr-<em>bin</em>, <em>every</em>where. Moy <em>wort</em>. Miss Sissie
<a class="pagenum" title="272" id="page-272"/>
you are a grown-up grand foine young lady.
What is it all about? No joke; <em>tell</em> me I say.
Mrs. Bailey sat at ease smiling triumphantly. A
grand foine dinner.... Well you wouldn’t
have me <em>starve</em> my boarduz. <em>Boarders</em> murmured
Mr. Rodkin, <em>My</em> God. He jerked his head back
with a laugh and jerked it down again. Well it’s
good business anyhow. <em>Bless</em> my heart! They
talked familiarly on, two tired worn people in a
little blaze of mutual congratulation. Mr.
Rodkin had come to stay at once without going
away. He noticed no one but the Baileys and
questioned on and on yawning and laughing
with sudden jerks of his head.
</p>
<p>
Coming back from sitting flirting with Eleanor
at Donizetti’s, Miriam wandered impatiently
into the dark dining-room. Eleanor was not her
guest. Why didn’t she go up to her room and
leave her to the dim street-lit dining-room and
the nightly journey up through the darkness to
her garret in freedom. Bed-time she hinted
irritably, tugging at the tether. Bed-time echoed
Eleanor, her smooth humouring nurse’s voice
bringing in her world of watchful diplomatic
manœuvring, scattering the waiting population
of the familiar dim room. I’m going to bed
<a class="pagenum" title="273" id="page-273"/>
stated Miriam advancing towards the windows.
On the table under the window that was the most
brightly lit by the street-lamps was a paper, a
pamphlet ... coloured; blue. She took
it up. It hung limply in her hand, the paper felt
pitted and poor, like very thin blotting paper.
<em>Young Ireland</em> she read printed in thick heavy
black lettering across the top of the page. The
words stirred her profoundly, calling to something
far away within her, long ago. Underneath
the thick words two short columns side by side
began immediately. They went on for several
pages and were followed by short paragraphs
with headings; she pressed close to the lit
window, peering; there were blotchy badly
printed <a id="corr-68"/>asterisks between small groups of lines.
Heavy black headings further on, like the title,
but smaller, and followed by thick exclamation
signs. It was a sort of little newspaper, the angry
print too heavy for the thin paper. Green. It
was green all through ... <em>Ireland</em>; home-rule.
I <em>say</em> she exclaimed eagerly. That was the
grey man. <em>Irish</em>. That’s all going on still she said
solicitously to a large audience. <em>What</em> dear asked
Eleanor’s figure close to her side. Ireland,
breathed Miriam. We’ve got a home-ruler in
<a class="pagenum" title="274" id="page-274"/>
the house. Look at this; green all through.
It’s some propaganda, in London, very angry.
I ’ope the home-ruler isn’t green all through
chuckled Eleanor smoothly. It’s the wearin’ o’
the green scolded Miriam. The Emerald Isle.
We’re so stupid. An Irish girl I knew told me
she ‘just couldn’t bear to face thinking’ of the
way we treat our children.
</p>
<p>
Leaving Eleanor abruptly in darkness in her
bedroom she shut the door and stepped into
freedom. The cistern gurgled from the upper
dark freshness. Her world was uninvaded.
Klah-rah <em>Buck</em>, in reverent unctuousness, waiting
for responsive awe from those sitting round. He
meant Clara Butt. Then she had been to Canada.
He had expected.... Little Mrs. Hurd had
sat birdlike at a Morning Musical hearing the
sweep of the tremendous voice. I have never
heard it, but I know how it rolls tremendously
out and sweeps. I can hear it by its effect on
them. They would not believe that. Rounding
the sweep of the little staircase she was surprised
by a light under the box-room door. Mrs.
Bailey, at midnight, busy in the little box-room?
How could she find room to have the door shut?
Her garret felt fresh and free. Summer rain
<a class="pagenum" title="275" id="page-275"/>
pattering on the roof in the darkness. The
<em>Colonisation of Ulster</em>. Her mind turned the
pages of a school essay, page after page, no red-ink
corrections, the last page galloping along one
long sentence; “until England shall have
recognised her cruel folly.” 10; <em>excellent</em>,
E.B.R. A fraud and yet not a fraud. Never
having thought of Ireland before reading it up in
Green, and then some strange indignation and
certainty, coming suddenly while writing; there
for always. I had forgotten about it. A man’s
throat was cleared in the box-room. The tone
of the wandering voice.... Mrs. Bailey had
screwed him into that tiny hole. <em>I’ll</em> be all 
<em>right</em>....
What a shame. He must not know anyone
knew he was there. He did not know he was the
first to disturb the top landing.... He did not
disturb it. There were no English thoughts in
there, nothing of the downstairs house. Julia
Doyle, Dublin Bay, <em>Clontarf</em>; fury underneath,
despairing of understanding, <em>showing</em> how the
English understood nothing, themselves nor anyone
else. But the Irish were not people ... they
did not care for <em>anything</em>. Meredith was partly
Celtic. <em>That</em> was why his writing always felt
to be pointing in some invisible direction. He
<a class="pagenum" title="276" id="page-276"/>
wrote so much because he did not care about
anything. Novelists were angry men lost in a fog.
But how did they find out how to do it? Brain.
Frontal development. But it was not certain
that that was not just the extra piece wanted to
control the bigger muscular system. Sacrificed
to muscle. Going about with more muscles and
a bit more brain, if <em>size</em> means <em>more</em>, doing all
kinds of different <em>set</em> pieces of work in the world,
each in a space full of problems none of them
could agree about.
</p>
<h3 class="no" id="subchap-0-9-5">
5
</h3>
<p class="noindent">
“<em>Gracious.</em> You’ll ave to be up early in the
morning to say all those names dear.”
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-10">
<a class="pagenum" title="277" id="page-277"/>
CHAPTER X
</h2>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">E</span><span class="postfirstchar">leanor’s</span> cab rumbled away round the
corner. Mrs. Bailey was still standing at
the top of the steps. Miriam ran up the steps
looking busily ahead. It’s going to be a lovely
evening she said as she passed Mrs. Bailey. She
was safely in the hall. But the front door was
closed and Mrs. Bailey was in the hall just behind
her. She turned abruptly, almost colliding with
her, into the dining-room. Mrs. Bailey’s presence
was there waiting for her in the empty room.
Behind her just inside the door was Mrs. Bailey,
blocking the way to the untrammelled house.
There’s quite a lot of August left she quoted from
the thoughts that had poured down to meet her
as she stood facing the stairs. The clock on the
mantelpiece was telling the time of Mrs. Bailey’s
day. The empty room was waiting for the next
event, a spread meal, voices sounding towards a
centre, distracting attention from its increasing
shabbiness ... there was never <em>long</em> for it
<a class="pagenum" title="278" id="page-278"/>
to remain sounding its shabbiness, the sound of
dust, into the empty space. Events going on and
on, giving no time to get in, behind the dusty
shabbiness to the sweet dreams and health and
quiet breathing....
</p>
<p>
“What a jolly big room this <em>is</em>, isn’t it?” 
she
demanded, turning towards Mrs. Bailey’s shapely
skimpy form. Mrs. Bailey knew she was chafing in
the airless shabby room. The windows closed to
keep the dust <em>out</em> made the dust <em>smell</em>.
</p>
<p>
“Isn’t it?” agreed Mrs. Bailey cordially.
</p>
<p>
“You <em>must</em> have been glad to get rid of the
lodgers and have possession of the whole house.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes” said Mrs. Bailey straightening the
sideboard cloth.
</p>
<p>
Hearty agreement about the advantages and
disadvantages of boarders and then, I think it’s
very <em>plucky</em> of you and away upstairs. A few
words about the interest of having boarders to
begin getting to the door with.
</p>
<p>
“The Irishman’s an interesting specimen of
humanity.”
</p>
<p>
“Isn’t he interesting,” laughed Mrs. Bailey
moving further into the room.
</p>
<p>
“It’s much more interesting to have boarders
than lodgers” said Miriam moving along the
<a class="pagenum" title="279" id="page-279"/>
pathway of freedom towards the open door. Mrs.
Bailey stood silent, watching politely. There
was no way out. Mrs. Bailey’s presence would
be waiting in the hall, and upstairs, unappeased.
Miriam glanced towards her without meeting
her eyes and sat limply down on the nearest
chair.
</p>
<p>
“Phoo—it’s rather a relief,” she murmured.
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Bailey went briskly to the door and closed
it and came freely back into the room, a little
exacting figure who had seen all her selfish rejoicing.
She would get up now and walk about the
room, talking easily and eloquently about Eleanor’s
charm and go away leaving Mrs. Bailey mystified
and disposed of.
</p>
<p>
“My <em>word</em>” declared Mrs. Bailey tweaking the
window curtains. Then Mrs. Bailey <em>was</em> ready
and anxious to talk her over and impart her
opinion. After seeming to like her so much and
being so attentive and sending her off so gaily and
kindly, she had some grievance. It was not the
bill. It was a matter of opinion. Mrs. Bailey
had been charmed and had yet seen through her.
Seen what? What was the everlasting secret of
Eleanor? She imagined them standing talking
together, politely, and joking and laughing. Mrs.
<a class="pagenum" title="280" id="page-280"/>
Bailey would like Eleanor’s jokes; they would be
in agreement with her own opinions about things.
But she had formed some idea of her and was
ready to express it. If it explained anything one
would have to accept it, from Mrs. Bailey.
To make nice general remarks about her and
enquire insincerely about the bill would be never
to get Mrs. Bailey’s uninfluenced opinion. She
would not give it unless she were asked.
</p>
<p>
“I’m awfully sorry for her,” she said in Eve’s
voice. That would mean just her poverty and
her few clothes and delicate health. There could
be an insincere discussion. It might end in
nothing and the mean selfish joy would still be
waiting upstairs as soon as one had forgotten that
it was mean and selfish.
</p>
<p>
“So am <em>I</em>” said Mrs. Bailey heartily. There
was anger in her face. There really <em>was</em> something,
some really bad opinion about Eleanor. Mrs.
Bailey thought these things more important than
joyful freedom. She was one of those people who
would do things; then there were other people
too; then one need not trouble about what it was
or warn people against Eleanor. The world would
find out and protect itself, passing her on. If
Mrs. Bailey felt there was something wrong, no
<a class="pagenum" title="281" id="page-281"/>
one need feel blamed for thinking so. There was.
<em>What</em> was it?
</p>
<p>
“I’m the last to be down on anyone in difficulties”
said Mrs. Bailey.
</p>
<p>
“Oh yes.” It was coming.
</p>
<p>
“It’s the <em>way</em> of people <em>I</em> look to.” 
She stopped.
<a id="corr-71"/>If she were not pressed she would say no
more.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, by the way, Mrs. Bailey, has her bill been
settled?” The voice of Mrs. Lionel ...
she’s unsquashable my dear, absolutely unsquashable.
You never saw <em>anything</em> like it in your <em>life</em>.
But she’s done frerself in Weston. It might
finish the talk.
</p>
<p>
“That’s all in order young lady. It’s not that
at all.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh, I know. I’m glad though.”
</p>
<p>
“I had my own suspicions before you told me
you’d be responsible. I never thought about
that.”
</p>
<p>
“No, I see.”
</p>
<p>
“It’s the <em>way</em> of people.”
</p>
<p>
“Well you know I told you at once that you
must have her here at your own risk after the first
week, and that I hardly knew anything about her.”
If she had paid the two weeks so easily perhaps
<a class="pagenum" title="282" id="page-282"/>
Mr. Taunton was still looking after her needs.
No. She would have mentioned him. He had
dropped her entirely; after all he had said.
</p>
<p>
“I’m not blaming you, young lady.” Perhaps
Mrs. Bailey had offered advice and been rebuffed
in some way. There would be some mysterious
description of character; like the Norwegian
... ‘selfish in a way I couldn’t describe to
you’....
</p>
<p>
“If I’d known what it was going to be I’d not
have had her in the house two days.”
</p>
<p>
... some man ... who? ... but
they were out all day and Eleanor had been with
her every evening. Besides Mrs. Bailey would
sympathise with that.... She was furiously
angry; “not two days.” But she <em>had</em> been
charmed. Charmed and admiring.
</p>
<p>
“Did she flirt with some one?”
</p>
<p>
“That” said Mrs. Bailey gravely, “I can’t
tell you. She may have; that’s her own affair.
I wouldn’t necessary blame her. Everyone’s
free to do as they like provided they behave
theirselves.” Mrs. Bailey was brushing at her
skirt with downcast eyes.
</p>
<p>
... This woman had opened Dr. von
Heber’s letter; knew he was coming next year;
<a class="pagenum" title="283" id="page-283"/>
knew that he “would not have permitted” any
talk at all, and that all her interference was
meaningless. <em>He</em> was coming, carrying his suitcase
out of the hospital, no need for the smart
educated Canadian nurses to think about him
... taking ship ... coming back. Perhaps
she resented having been in the wrong.
</p>
<p>
“It was funny how she found a case so suddenly,”
said Miriam drawing herself upright, careless,
like a tree in the wind. She had already forgotten
she would always feel like that, her bearing altered
for ever, held up by him, like a tree in the wind,
everyone powerless to embarrass her. Poor Mrs.
Bailey....
</p>
<p>
“You see I feel I drove her to it, in a way.”
</p>
<p>
Mrs. Bailey listened smiling keenly.
</p>
<p>
“Yes you <em>see</em>” pursued Miriam cheerfully,
“I told her she would be all right for a week. I
blamed <em>you</em> for that, said you were flourishing
and she could pay when her ship came home.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s what you told her eh?”
</p>
<p>
“Well and then when she admitted she had no
money and I knew I couldn’t manage more than
a week, I advised her to apply to the C.O.S. She
said she would and seemed delighted and when I
asked her about it later she cried and said she
<a class="pagenum" title="284" id="page-284"/>
hadn’t been. I said she must do <em>something</em> and
then suddenly this case appeared. <em>Where</em> I don’t
know.”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t blame her for not wanting to go
<em>there</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“Why?”
</p>
<p>
“My word. I’d as soon go straight to the
parish.”
</p>
<p>
“Wilberforce believes in them. He says if
you really want to help the helpless you will not
flaunt your name in subscription lists but hand
your money over to the C.O.S. They are the
only charitable organization that does not pauperise.”
</p>
<p>
“Him? Wilberforce? He has a right to his
own opinions I don’t deny. But if he’d ever
been in difficulties he might change them.
<em>Insulting</em>, that’s my opinion. My word the
<em>questions</em> they ask. You can’t call your soul your
own.”
</p>
<p>
“I didn’t know that. That friend my sister
brought here was being helped by them.”
</p>
<p>
“How is Miss Henderson?”
</p>
<p>
“Perfectly happy. Being with the Greens
again seems <em>Paradise</em> she says, after London.
She’s satisfied now.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="285" id="page-285"/>
“Mts. She’s a sweet young lady; them’s
fortunate as have her.”
</p>
<p>
“Well now she’s tried something else she
appreciates the beautiful home. I don’t think
she wants to be free.”
</p>
<p>
“Quite so. Persons differ. But she’s her own
mistress; free to leave.”
</p>
<p>
“Of course it’s nicer now. The children are
at school. She’s confidential companion. They
all like her so much. They invented it for her.”
</p>
<p>
“Quite right. That’s as it should be.”
</p>
<p>
“And she is absolutely in Mrs. Green’s confidence
now. I don’t know what poor Mrs.
Green would do without her. She went back
just in time for a most <em>fearful</em> tragedy.”
</p>
<p>
“Tss; dear—<em>dear</em>” murmured Mrs. Bailey
waiting with frowning calm eagerness. Miriam
hesitated. It would be a long difficult story to
make Mrs. Bailey see stupid commercial wealth.
She would see wealthy “people,” a “gentleman”
living in a large country house, and not understand
Mr. Green at all; but <em>Eve</em>, getting the
bunch of keys from the ironmonger’s and writing
to Bennett to find out about Rupert Street ...
and the <em>detective</em>. She would have it in her mind
like a novel and never let it go. It would be a
<a class="pagenum" title="286" id="page-286"/>
breach of confidence.... She paused, not
knowing what to do with her sudden animation.
It was too late to get back into being an impartial
listener, on the verge of going away. She had
told everything, without the interesting details.
Mrs. Bailey was waiting for them. They were
still safe. She might think it was an illness or
something about a relative. The only thing to
do now was to stay and work off the unexplained
animation on anything Mrs. Bailey might choose
to say. “Well” said Mrs. Bailey presently, “to
return to our friend. What I say is, why doesn’t
she go to the clergy, in her own parish?”
</p>
<p>
“Go on the parish, m’m.”
</p>
<p>
“Not necessarily on the parish. The clergy’s
most helpful and sympathetic. They might tell
her of those who would help her.”
</p>
<p>
“They might. But it’s most awfully difficult.
<em>Nobody</em> knows what ought to be done about these
things.”
</p>
<p>
“That is so. But there’s a right and a wrong
in everything. There’s plenty of people willing
to help those that will help theirselves. But
that’s very different to coming into a person’s
house to try and get money out of strangers.”
</p>
<p>
“I <em>say</em>.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="287" id="page-287"/>
“It is I <em>say</em>. I never felt so ashamed in my
life.”
</p>
<p>
“I <em>say</em>.... Did they tell you?”
</p>
<p>
“Mrs. Hurd came to me herself.”
</p>
<p>
“Mrs. Hurd. Of course, it would be.”
</p>
<p>
“My word. I <em>was</em> wild. And them only just
come into my house.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes, of course; I <em>say</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“Tellin’ them she was <em>ill</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“She is ill you know.”
</p>
<p>
“There’s some imagines theirselves ill. If she
was anything like as ill as I am she might have
something to complain about.”
</p>
<p>
“I think she’s rather plucky. She doesn’t want
to give in. It’s a kind of illness that doesn’t show
much. I know her doctor. He’s a Harley Street
man. <em>He</em> says that her kind of disorder makes
it absolutely impossible for the patient to tell
the truth. I don’t believe that. It’s just one of
those doctory things they all repeat.”... What
is truth said jesting Pilate and did not wait for an
answer. <em>Their</em> idea of truth—
</p>
<p>
“Well if she is ill why doesn’t she act according?”
</p>
<p>
“Look <em>after</em> herself a bit. Yes. That’s what
she wants to do. But not give in.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="288" id="page-288"/>
“Quite so. That’s a thing a person can understand.
But that doesn’t make it right to come to
private people and behave in the way she has done.
Strangers. I never met such conduct, nor heard
of it.”
</p>
<p>
“No.”
</p>
<p>
“She’s got relatives I suppose; or friends.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, that’s just it. I don’t think she has. I
suppose the truth is all her friends are tired of
helping her.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, I’m not judging her there. There’s
none can be so cruel as relatives, as <em>I</em> know, my
word.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes.”
</p>
<p>
“They’ll turn from you when you’re struggling
to the utmost to help yourself, going on ill, left
with four young children, your husband cut off
and not a <em>penny</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes.”
</p>
<p>
“I agree with her there. I owe all I have, under
Providence, to my own hands and the help
coming from strangers I had no claim on. But
why doesn’t she act open? That’s what <em>I</em> say
and I know it. There’s always those ready to
help you if you’ll do your part. It’s all take and
no give with some.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="289" id="page-289"/>
“Vampires. People <em>are</em> extraordinary.”
</p>
<p>
“You’d say so if you had this house to manage.”
</p>
<p>
“I suppose so.”
</p>
<p>
“You get your eyes open. With one and
another.”
</p>
<p>
“I’d no idea she’d even been talking to the
Hurds.”
</p>
<p>
“Talk? Well I don’t mind telling you now
she’s gone.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, she won’t come back again. If she
ever does Mrs. Bailey I hereby refuse all responsibility.
On your head be it if you take her in. <em>I</em>
can’t keep her.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, as I say, I’m free to tell you. They
used to go upstairs into the drawn-room, mornings,
after breakfast. I could hear that woman’s voice
going on and on. I was up and down the stairs.
What’s more she used to stop dead the minute
I came in.”
</p>
<p>
“Well I am sorry you’ve had all this.”
</p>
<p>
“I’m not blaming you, young lady.”
</p>
<p>
“What about all the others?”
</p>
<p>
“Rodkin and <a id="corr-72"/>Helsing and <a id="corr-73"/>Gunner’s out all
day.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes but the others? The Manns and the
Irish journalist.”
</p>
<p>
<a class="pagenum" title="290" id="page-290"/>
“She’d be clever to get anything out of any
of <em>them</em>.”
</p>
<p>
“I wonder she didn’t try Mrs. Barrow. She’s
kind I’m sure and gullible.”
</p>
<p>
“She’s very kind no doubt in her way. Anyway
she’s not one of those who live on a widow
woman and pay nothing.”
</p>
<p>
The old sense of the house was crumbling.
To Mrs. Bailey it was <em>worry</em> and things she could
not talk about to anyone, and a few nice people
here and there. And all the time she was <em>polite</em>;
as if she liked them all, equally. And they were
polite. Everyone was polite. And behind it was
all this. Shifts and secrets and strange characters.
When they were all together at Mrs. Bailey’s
dinner, they were all carrying things off, politely.
Perhaps already she regretted having sent away
the lodgers.
</p>
<p>
“The doctors were nice people to have in the
house.”
</p>
<p>
“Wasn’t they dear boys? <em>Very</em> nice gentlemen.
Canadians are the ones to my mind, though
I believe as much as any in standing by your own.
But you’ve got to consider your interests.”
</p>
<p>
“Of course.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s why I mean to ad<em>ver</em>tiss. My word
<a class="pagenum" title="291" id="page-291"/>
those Hurds are good friends if you like. I
couldn’t tell you. The old man’s put an advert
for me in the Canadian place in the city.”
</p>
<p>
“Then you’ll have a houseful of Canadians.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s what I <em>hope</em>. The more the better
of their kind.”
</p>
<p>
“We shall all be speaking Canadian.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, since we’re on the subject, Mrs. Hurd
advises me to <em>go</em> to Canada. Says it’s all work
and no pay over here. Everybody expects too
much for too little.”
</p>
<p>
How <em>could</em> she rejoice in the idea of a house
full of Canadians? All the same. Canadian.
It would change the house more and more.
Mrs. Bailey would not mind that. The house
meant nothing to her just as it was with its effect.
She had to make it pay. If another house would
pay better she would just as soon have another
house. “You wouldn’t like to leave London;
there’s no place like London.” The Hurds
thought everyone in the house <em>selfish</em>, living on
Mrs. Bailey’s work, enjoying the house for nothing,
forgetting her. It was true ... uneasy
in her presence....
</p>
<h2 class="chapter" id="chapter-0-11">
<a class="pagenum" title="292" id="page-292"/>
CHAPTER XI
</h2>
<p class="first">
<span class="firstchar">M</span><span class="postfirstchar">iriam</span> got up early the next morning
and went to her window in her night-gown.
There was a thick August haze in the
square. The air smelt moist. She leaned out
into the chill of it. Her body was full of sleep
and strength; all one strength from head to
feet. She heard life in the silence, and went
through her getting up as quickly as possible,
listening all the time to the fresh silence.
</p>
<p>
She went downstairs feeling like a balloon on a
string; her feet touching the stairs lightly as if
there were no weight in her body. At the end of
the long journey came the smiling familiar surprise
of the hall. The hall table was clear, a stretch of
grey marble in the morning light. The letters
had been taken into the dining-room. There
was something, a package, on the far corner, a
book package, with a note, Silurian blue, <em>Eleanor</em>.
Small straggly round handwriting, yes, Eleanor’s,
<em>R. Rodkin, Esq</em>: <em>Ah.</em> Mr. <em>Rodkin</em>. How had
<a class="pagenum" title="293" id="page-293"/>
she done it? When? Carrying off a book.
Pretending she had forgotten, and writing. Sly
cleverness. What a blessing she had gone....
Booming through her uneasiness came a
great voice from the dining-room. Through the
misty corridors of the <em>Dawn</em> it bellowed. She
went gladly in towards poetry. Mrs. Bailey was
presiding over an early breakfast. The Irishman,
sitting back mirthfully in his chair on the far
side of the table and at his side a big stout man
with a bushy black beard, brilliant laughing eyes
staring at nothing from a flushed face. Mrs.
Bailey was watching him with a polite smile; he
looked as though he were at supper; making the
room seem hot, obliterating the time of day. I
expect you had a rough crossing, she said politely.
I <em>saw</em> her, he bellowed flinging back his head and
roaring out words and laughter together. She
walks in <em>Beauty</em>. I saw her sandalled feet; upon
the <em>Hills</em>.
</p>
