<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>Miriam got up early the next morning and went to her window in her night-gown. There was a thick August haze in the square. The air smelt moist. She leaned out into the chill of it. Her body was full of sleep and strength; all one strength from head to feet. She heard life in the silence, and went through her getting up as quickly as possible, listening all the time to the fresh silence.</p>
			<p>She went downstairs feeling like a balloon on a string; her feet touching the stairs lightly as if there were no weight in her body. At the end of the long journey came the smiling familiar surprise of the hall. The hall table was clear, a stretch of grey marble in the morning light. The letters had been taken into the dining-room. There was something, a package, on the far corner, a book package, with a note, Silurian blue, <em>Eleanor</em>. Small straggly round handwriting, yes, Eleanor’s, <em>R. Rodkin, Esq</em>: <em>Ah.</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <em>Rodkin</em>. How had she done it? When? Carrying off a book. Pretending she had forgotten, and writing. Sly cleverness. What a blessing she had gone.⁠ ⁠… Booming through her uneasiness came a great voice from the dining-room. Through the misty corridors of the <em>Dawn</em> it bellowed. She went gladly in towards poetry. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was presiding over an early breakfast. The Irishman, sitting back mirthfully in his chair on the far side of the table and at his side a big stout man with a bushy black beard, brilliant laughing eyes staring at nothing from a flushed face. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was watching him with a polite smile; he looked as though he were at supper; making the room seem hot, obliterating the time of day. I expect you had a rough crossing, she said politely. I <em>saw</em> her, he bellowed flinging back his head and roaring out words and laughter together. She walks in <em>Beauty</em>. I saw her sandalled feet; upon the <em>Hills</em>.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
