<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<section id="chapter-6-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<p>Miriam came forward seeing nothing but the golden gaslight pouring over the white tablecloth. She sat down near <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey within the edge of its radiance. The depths of the light still held unchanged the welcome that had been there when she had come in and found Emile laying the table. There was no change and no disappointment. The smeary mirrors and unpolished furniture were bright in the gaslight, showing distances of interior and gleaming passages of light. In the spaces between the pictures the walls sent back sheeny reflections of the glow on the table. People coming in one by one saying good evening in different intonations and sitting down sending out waves of enquiry, left her undisturbed. There were five or six forms about the table besides Sissie sitting at the far end opposite her mother. They made sudden statements about the weather one after the other. They were waiting to have their daily experience of the meal changed by something she might do or say. Emile was handing round plates of soup. Presently they would all be talking and would have forgotten her. Then she could see them all one by one and get away unseen, having had dinner only with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was standing up carving the joint. When the sounds she made were all that was to be heard, she responded to the last remark about the weather or asked some fresh question about it as if no one had spoken at all. When she was not speaking every movement of her battle with the joint expressed her triumphant affectionate sense of Miriam’s presence. She had made no introductions. She was saying secretly there you are young lady. I told you so. Now you’re in your right place. It’s quite easy you see. The joint was already partly distributed. Emile was handing <em>three</em> piled dishes of vegetables. A generous plateful of well-browned meat and gravy appeared before Miriam with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey’s strong small toil-disfigured hand firmly grasping its edge. She took it to pass it on. Everything was hurrying on.⁠ ⁠… That’s yorce my child said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey. The low murmur was audible round the silent table. Asserting her independence with a sullen formality Miriam thanked her and looked about for condiments without raising her eyes to the range of those other eyes, all taking photographs now that she was forced into movements. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey placed a cruet near her plate. Yorce she pondered getting angrily away into thought. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey <em>could</em> not know that it might be said to be more correct than yourz. It was an affectation. She had picked it up somewhere from one of those people who carefully say off-ten instead of awfen and it gave her satisfaction to use it, linked rebukingly up with the complacent motherly patronage of which she had boasted to the whole table. The first of Emile’s dishes appeared over her left shoulder and she saw as she turned unprepared, raised heads turned towards her end of the table. She scooped her vegetables quickly and clumsily out of the dishes. In her awkward movements and her unprotected raised face she felt, and felt all the observers seeing, the marks of her disgrace. They saw her looking like Eve nervously helping herself to vegetables in the horrible stony cold dark restaurant of the hostel. They saw that she resented <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey’s public familiarity and could do nothing. She tried to look bored and murmured thank you when she had taken her third vegetable. It sounded out like a proclamation in the intense silence and she turned angrily to her plate trying to remember whether she had heard anyone else thank Emile for vegetables.⁠ ⁠… After all she was paying for the meal and her politeness to Emile was her own affair. Abroad people bowed or raised their hats going in and out of shops and said Monsieur to policemen. Her efforts to eat abstractedly and to appear plunged in thought made her feel more and more like a poor relation. The details of her meeting with Eve kept appearing in and out of her attempt to get back her sense of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey’s house as a secret warmth and brightness added to the many resources of her life. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey knew that her house had been transformed by the meeting with Eve and was trying to tell her that she was not as independent as she thought.</p>
				<p>What were the exact things she had told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey? She had talked excitedly and scrappily and all the time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey had been gathering information and drawing her own conclusions about the Hendersons. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey saw Eve’s arrival at the station and her weary resentment of having everything done for her in the London manner, her revenge in the cab, sitting back and making the little abstracted patronising sounds in response to everything that was said to her, taking no interest, and at last saying <em>how</em> you run on. She saw something of the hostel.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Where’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizzable? demanded Sissie.⁠ ⁠… The Girls’ Friendly; that was the name of that other thing. But that was for servants. The Young Women’s Bible Association was the worst disgrace that could happen to a gentlewoman.⁠ ⁠… Eve had liked it. She had suddenly begun going about with an interested revived face eagerly doing what she was told. She was there now, it was her only home, and she must have all her meals there for cheapness; there would be no outside life for her. Her life was imprisoned by those women, consciously goody conscientious servants with flat caps, dominating everything, revelling in the goody atmosphere; the young women in the sitting-room all looking <em>raw</em>, as if they washed very early in the morning in cold water and did their shabby hair with cold hands; the superintendent, the watchful official expression on her large well-fed elderly high-school-girl face, the <em>way</em> she sat on a footstool with her arms round her knees pretending to be easy and jolly while she recited that it was a privilege and a joy for sisters to be so near to each other⁠ ⁠… as if she were daring us to deny it. I shan’t see very much of Eve. She won’t want me to. She will strike up a friendship with one of those young women.⁠ ⁠… Miriam found herself glancing up the table towards the centre of a conflict. They were all joined in conflict over some common theme. No one was outside it; the whole table was in an uproar of voices and laughter.⁠ ⁠… It was nothing but Miss Scott saying things about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal and everyone watching and throwing in remarks.⁠ ⁠… Miss Scott was neighing across the table at something that had been said and was preparing to speak again without breaking into her laughter. All faces were turned her way. “What’s that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Joe-anzen says?” laughed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey towards the last speaker. The invisible man opposite Miss Scott was not even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Helsing; only the younger fainter Norwegian, and this side of him an <em>extraordinary</em> person⁠ ⁠… an abruptly bulging coarse fringe, a coarse-grained cheek bulging from under an almost invisible deep-sunken eye, and abruptly shelving bust under a coarse serge bodice.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Yo-hanson says <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendy-zahble like n-gaiety.” Miriam glanced across the table. That was <em>all</em>. That little man with an adenoid voice and a narrow sniggering laugh that brought a flush and red spots all over his face, and shiny straight Sunday school hair watered and brushed flat, made up the party. Next to him was only Polly. Then came Miss Scott on Sissie’s left; then Sissie and round the corner the Norwegian. Everyone looked dreadful in the harsh light, secret and secretly hostile to everyone else, unwilling to be there; and even here though there was nothing and no one there was that everlasting conversational fussing and competition.</p>
				<p>“Quite right,” hooted the bulky woman in a high pure girlish voice, “I doan blame ’im.”</p>
				<p>Miriam turned towards the unexpectedness of her voice and sat helplessly observing. The serge sleeves were too short to cover her heavy red wrists; her pudgy hands held her knife and fork broadside, like salad servers. Her hair was combed flatly up over her large skull and twisted into a tiny screw at the top just behind the bulge of her fringe. Could she possibly be a boarder? She looked of far less consequence even than the Baileys. Her whole person was unconsciously ill at ease, making one feel ashamed.</p>
				<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> m-Barrow is another of ’em,” said the little man with his eyebrows raised as he sniggered out the words.</p>
				<p>“I <em>am</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunna, I doan believe in go-an abate with a face like a fiddle.”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner’s laughter flung back his head and sat him upright and brought him back to lean over his plate shaking noiselessly with his head sunk sideways between his raised shoulders as if he were dodging a blow. The eyes he turned maliciously towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> <a id="corr-30"/>Barrow were a hard opaque pale blue. His lips turned outwards as he ate and his knife and fork had an upward tilt when at rest. Some of his spots were along the margin of his lips, altering their shape and making them look angry and sore. The eating part of his face was sullen and angry, not touched by the laughter that drew his eyebrows up and wrinkled his bent forehead and sounded only as a little click in his throat at each breath.</p>
				<p>“There’s plenty of glum folks abate,” scolded <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Barrow.</p>
				<p>Miriam was aware that she was recoiling visibly, and tried to fix her attention on her meal. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was carving large second helpings and Emile’s vegetable dishes had been refilled. None of these people thought it extraordinary that there should be all this good meal and a waiter, every day⁠ ⁠… it would be shameful to come again for the sake of the meal, feeling hostile. Besides, it would soon be unendurable; they would be aware of criticisms and would resent them. The only way to be able to come would be to pretend to laugh at remarks about people and join in discussions on opinions about cheerfulness and seriousness and winter and summer. They would not know that one was not sincere. They were perfectly sincere in their laughter and talk. They all had some sort of common understanding, even when they disagreed. It was the same everlasting problem again, the way people took everything for granted. They would be pleased, would turn and like one if one could say heartily <em>isn’t</em> he a funny little man, mts, my <em>word</em>, or well I don’t see anything particularly funny about him, or <em>oh</em>, give me the <em>summer</em>. But if one did that one would presently be worn and strained with lying, left with an empty excitement, while they went serenely on their way, and the reality that was there when one first sat down with them would have gone. Always and always in the end there was nothing but to be alone. And yet it needed people in the world to make the reality when one was alone. Perhaps just these uninterfering people, when one had forgotten their personal peculiarities and had only the consciousness of them in the distance.⁠ ⁠… One might perhaps then wonder sometimes longingly what they were saying about the weather. But to be <em>obliged</em> to meet them daily.⁠ ⁠… She chided herself for the scathing glance she threw at the unconscious guests. Gunner was smiling sideways down the table again prepared to execute his laugh when he should have caught an eye and sent his grin home. Miriam almost prayed that nothing should provoke him again to speech. During a short silence she cleared her throat elaborately to cover the sound of his eating. Several voices broke out together, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was suddenly saying something privately to her. She raised her head towards the bright promise and was aware of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner thoughtful and serene. There was a pleasant intelligence somewhere about his forehead. If only she could think his head clear and cool and not have to hear again the hot dull hollow resonance of his voice how joyfully she would be listening to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey. I’ve got a very special message for you young lady she had said and now went on with her eye on the conflict at the end of the table into which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner was throwing comments and exclamations from afar. The room beamed softly in its golden light. From the heart of the golden light <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was hurrying towards her with good tidings.</p>
				<p>“<em>Hah.</em>”⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey looked round cloaking her vexation in a bridling smile as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal came in sturdily beaming. He sat down amidst the general outcry and Emile busied himself to lay him a place. He shouted answers to everyone, sitting with his elbows on the table. Putting her elbows on the table <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey applauded with little outbursts of laughter. She had dropped the idea of delivering her message. Miriam finished her pudding hurriedly. The din was increasing. No one was aware of her. Cautiously rising she asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey to excuse her. You go Miss? shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal suddenly looking her way. He looked extraordinary, not himself.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">2</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent">Eve’s shop was a west-end blaze of flowers. The window was blocked with flowers in jars, tied up in large bundles. In front were gilt baskets of hothouse flowers. Propped in the middle were a large flower anchor and a flower horseshoe, both trimmed with large bows of white satin ribbon⁠—women in white satin evening dresses with trains, bowing from platforms⁠—on either side were tight dance buttonholes pinned on to heart-shaped velvet mounts.</p>
				<p>It was strange to be able to go in.⁠ ⁠… Going in to see an employee was not the right way to go into a west-end shop.⁠ ⁠… There <em>was</em> Eve; standing badly in a droopy black dress on a bare wet wooden floor. Cut flowers in stone jam pots, masses of greenery lying on a wet table. Hulloh aren’t your <em>feet</em> wet demanded Miriam irritably. Eve started and turned, looking. She was exhausted and excited, grappling dreamily with abrupt instructions with a conservatory smell competing with them; trying to become part of a clever arrangement to collect the conservatory smell for sale. She stepped slenderly forward; all her old Eve manner, but determined to guard against disturbance; making sounds without speaking, and the faint shape of a tired smile. She was worn out with the fatigue of trying to make herself into something else, but <a id="corr-32"/>liking it and determined not to be reminded of other things. Even her hair seemed to be changed. Full of pictures of Eve, gracefully dressed and with piled brown hair Miriam’s eyes passed in fury over the skimpy untidy sham shop-assistant, beginning a failure defensively, <em>imagining</em> behind it that she was taking hold of London.⁠ ⁠… Won’t you catch <em>cold</em>? You get used to it mouthed Eve nervously turning her head away and waiting, fumbling a scattered spray of smilax. Eve had always loved smilax. Did it seem the same to her now? Fancy <em>you</em> said Miriam, in all this damp. They were both miserable and Eve was not going to put it right. All her strength and interest was for this new thing. Do you like it? said Miriam beginning again. Yes awfully flushed Eve looking as if she were going to cry. It was too late. I suppose its awfully interesting asked Miriam formally, opening a conversation with a stranger. Mps said Eve warmly I simply love it. It makes you frightfully tired at first, but I find I can do things I never dreamed I could. I don’t <em>mind</em> standing in the wet a bit now. You have to if you’re obliged to. Eve was <em>liking</em> hardness imposed by other people. <em>Liking</em> the prices of her new life. Accepting them without resentment. People would despise and like her for that. Perhaps she would succeed in staying on if her strength did not give way. Her graceful dresses and leisurely brown hair going further and further away.⁠ ⁠… Do you <em>serve</em>? Ssh. I’m learning to. Eve would not look, and wanted her to be gone. I’m free for lunch said Miriam snappily, holding to the disappearing glory of her first coming out into London in the middle of a weekday. Eve should have guessed and stopped being anything but Eve being taken out to lunch. We could go to an <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.B.C.</abbr> Oh I can’t come <em>out</em> murmured Eve ignoringly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">3</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent">Miriam ordered another cup of coffee and went on reading. There was plenty of time. Eve would not appear at Tansley Street until half-past. In looking up at the clock she had become aware of detailed people grouped at tables. She plunged back into Norway, reading on and on. Each line was wonderful; but all in a darkness. Presently on some turned page something would shine out and make a meaning. It went on and on. It seemed to be going towards something. But there was nothing that <em>anyone</em> could imagine, nothing in life or in the world that could make it clear from the beginning, or bring it to an end. If the man died the author might stop. Finis. But it would not make any difference to anything. She turned the pages backwards rereading passages here and there. She could not remember having read them. Looking forward to portions of the dialogue towards the end of the book she found them familiar; as if she had read them before⁠ ⁠… she read them intently. They had more meaning read like that, without knowing to what they were supposed to refer. They were the <em>same</em>, read alone in scraps, as the early parts. It was all one book in some way, not through the thoughts, or the story, but something in the author. People who talked about the book probably understood the strange thoughts and the puzzling hinting story that began and came to an end and left everything as it was before. The author did not seem to suggest that you should be sorry. He seemed to know that at the end everything was as before, with the mountains all round.⁠ ⁠… The electric lights flashed out all over the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.B.C.</abbr> at once.⁠ ⁠… Miriam remained bent low over her book. Only you had been in Norway, in a cottage up amongst the mountains and out in the open. She read a scene at random and another and began again and read the first scene through and then the last. It was all the <em>same</em>. You might as well begin at the end.⁠ ⁠… In <em>Norway</em>, up among the misty mountains, in farms and cottages looking down on fjords with glorious scenery about them all the time are people, sitting in the winter by fires and worrying about right and wrong. They <em>wonder</em> but more gravely and clearly than we do. Torrents thunder in their ears and they can see mountains all the time even when they are indoors. “Ibsen’s Brand” is about all those worrying things, in magnificent scenery. You are <em>in</em> Norway while you read. That is why people read books by geniuses and look faraway when they talk about them. They know they have been somewhere you cannot go without reading the book.⁠ ⁠… <em>Brand</em>. You are in the strangeness of Norway⁠—and then there are people saying things that might be said anywhere. But with something going in and out of the words all the time. Ibsen’s genius. You can’t understand it or see where it is. Each sentence looks so ordinary, making you wonder what it is all about. But taking you somewhere, to stay, forgetting everything, until it is finished. An hour ago Ibsen was just a name people said in a particular way, a difficult wonderful mystery, and <em>improper</em>. Why do people say he is improper? He is exactly like everyone else, thinking and worrying about the same things. But putting them down in a background that is more real than people or thoughts. The life in the background is in the people. He does not know this. Why did he write it? A book by a genius is alive. That is why “Ibsen” is superior to novels; because it is not quite about the people or the thoughts. There is something else; a sort of lively freshness all over even the saddest parts, preventing your feeling sorry for the people. Everyone ought to know. It ought to be on the omnibuses and in the menu. All these people fussing about not knowing of Ibsen’s Brand. A volume, bound in a cover. Alive. Precious. What <em>is</em> Genius? Something that can take you into Norway in an <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">A.B.C.</abbr></p>
				<p>She wandered out into Oxford Street. There was a vast fresh gold-lit sky somewhere behind the twilight. Why did Ibsen sit down in Norway and write plays? Why did people say Ibsen as if it were the answer to something? Walking along Oxford Street with a read volume of Ibsen held against you is walking along with something precious between two covers which makes you know you are rich and free.⁠ ⁠… She wandered on and on in an expansion of everything that passed into her mind out and out towards a centre in Norway. She wondered whether Ibsen were still alive. A vast beautiful Norway and a man writing his thoughts in a made-up play. Genius. People go about saying Ibsen’s Brand as if it were the <em>answer</em> to <em>something</em> and Ibsen knows no more than anyone else.⁠ ⁠… She arrived at Tansley Street as from a great distance, suddenly wondering about her relationship with the sound of carts and near footfalls. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was standing in the doorway seeing someone off. <em>Eve</em>. Forgotten. I couldn’t get here before; I’m <em>so</em> sorry. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey had disappeared. Eve stepped back into the hall and stood serenely glowing in the half-light. Are you going? I must, in a minute. Eve was looking sweet; slenderly beautiful and with her crimson-rose bloom; shy and indulgent and unenviously admiring as she had been at home; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey had been having it all. Can’t you come upstayers? Not this time; I’ll come again some time. Well; you must just tell me; wot you been doing? Talking to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey? Yes. Eve had been flirting with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey; perhaps talking about religion. Isn’t she funny? I <em>like</em> her; she’s perfectly <em>genuine</em>, she means what she says and really <em>likes</em> people. Yes; I know. Isn’t it funny? I don’t think it’s funny; it’s very beautiful and rare. Would you like to be here always? Yes; I could be always with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey. Every day of your life forever and ever? <em>Rather.</em> Yes; I know. And y’know there are all <em>sorts</em> of interesting people. I wish you lived here Eve. Eve glanced down wisely smiling and moved slenderly towards the door. What about Sunday? Couldn’t you come round for a long time? No breathed Eve restrainingly, I’m going to <em>Sallies</em>. All Eve’s plans were people. She moved, painfully, through things, from person to person.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">4</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent"><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd held the door wide for Miriam to pass out and again his fresh closely knit worn brick-red face was deeply curved by the ironically chuckling hilarious smile with which he had met the incidents of the “awful German language.” That of the <em>fatherland</em>, the happy <em>fatherland</em>, nearly <em>dislocates</em> my <em>jaw</em> she could imagine him heartily and badly singing with a group of Canadian students. She smiled back at him without saying anything, rapidly piecing together the world that provoked his inclusive deeply carved smiles; himself, the marvellous little old country he found himself in as an incident of the business of forcing himself to be a doctor, his luck in securing an accomplished young English lady to prepare him for the struggle with the great medical world of Germany; his triumphant chuckling satisfaction in getting in first before the other fellows with an engagement to take her out.⁠ ⁠… The grandeur of this best bedroom of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was nothing to him. The room was just a tent in his wanderings.⁠ ⁠… For the moment he was going to take a young lady to a concert. That was how he saw it. He was a simple boyish red-haired open extension of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber. When she found herself out in the large grime and gloom of the twilit landing she realised that he had lifted her far further than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber into Canada; he was probably more Canadian. The ancient gloom of the house was nothing to him, he would get nothing of the quality of England in his personal life there, only passing glimpses from statements in books and in the conversation of other people. He did not see her as part of it all in the way <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber had done talking at the table that night and wanting to talk to her because she was part of it. He saw her as an accomplished young lady, but a young lady like a Canadian young lady and a fellow was a fool if he did not arrange to take her out quick before the other fellows. But there was nothing in it but just that triumph. “I’ll get a silk hat before Sunday”; he would prepare for her to go all the way down to the Albert Hall as a young lady being taken to a concert; the Albert Hall on Sunday was brass bands; he thought they were a concert. His world was thin and open; but the swift sunlit decision and freedom of his innocent reception of her in his bedroom lifted the dingy brown house of her long memories into a new background. She was to be fêted, in an assumed character and whether she liked it or no. The four strange men in the little back sitting-room were her competing friends, the friends of all nice young ladies. He was the one who had laughed the laugh she had heard in the hall, of course. They never appeared but somehow they had got to know of her and had their curious baseless set ways of thinking and talking about her. Being doctors and still students they ought to be the most hateful and awful kind of men in relation to women, thinking and believing all the horrors of medical science; the hundred golden rules of gynæcology; if they had been Englishmen they would have gone about making one want to murder them; but they did not; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd was studying gyn’kahl’jy, but he did not apply its ugly lies to life; to Canadians women were people⁠ ⁠… but they were all the <em>same</em> people to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">5</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent">That evening both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Heber and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd appeared at dinner. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey tumultuously arranged them opposite each other to her right and left. Miriam could not believe they were going to stay until they sat down. She retreated to the far end of the table taking her place on Sissie’s right hand, separated from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber by the thin Norwegian and the protruding bulk of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Barrow. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal with a pencil and paper at the side of his plate was squarely opposite to her. His <em>méfiant</em> sallies to the accompaniment of Sissie’s giggles and Miss Strong’s rapid sarcastic remarks, made a tumult hiding her silence. She heard nothing of the various conversations sprouting easily all round the table. The doctors were far-off strongholds of serenity, unconscious of their serenity, unconscious of her and of their extraordinary taking of the Baileys and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner for granted.⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber was a silence broken by small courteously curving remarks. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd laughed his leaping delighted laugh in and out of an unmeditated interchange with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey. If she had been at their end of the table they would not have perceived her thoughts, but they would have felt her general awareness and got up at last disliking her. They changed the atmosphere but could not make her forget the underlying unchanged elements nor rid her of her resentment of their unconsciousness of them. There was a long interval before the puddings appeared. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey was trying to answer questions about books. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd did not care for reading, but liked to be read to, by his sisters, in the evening, and had come away, at the most exciting part of a book⁠ ⁠… a wonderful authoress, what’s her name now⁠—⁠Rosie⁠—⁠Newchet.⁠ ⁠… He was just longing to know how it ended. Was it sweet and wonderful, or too dreadful for anything to contemplate a student, a fully qualified doctor having Rosa Nouchette Carey read to him by his sisters? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber was not joining in. Did he read novels and like them? No one had anything to say; no one here knew even of Rosa Nouchette Carey⁠ ⁠… and that man Hunter⁠ ⁠… he’s great⁠ ⁠… he’s father’s favourite; what’s this, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes of New York.⁠ ⁠… Archibald Clavering Gunter said Miriam suddenly, longing to be at the other end of the table. Beg pardon? said Sissie turning aside for a moment from watching <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal’s busy pencil. There he is shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal flinging out his piece of paper⁠—gastric ulcer⁠—there he is. There was a drawing of a sort of crab with huge claws.⁠—My beautiful gastric ulcer⁠—Have you been to the ’ospital today <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizzable asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey through the general laughter. I have been madame and I come away. They say they welcome me inside again soon. Je <a id="corr-35"/>m’en fiche. The faces of both doctors were turned enquiringly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd’s look of quizzical sympathy passed on towards Miriam and became a mask of suppressed hysterical laughter. Perhaps he and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Heber would scream and yell together afterwards and make a great story of a man in a London pension. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hurd would call him a <em>cure</em>. My word isn’t that chap a <em>cure</em>? Brave little man. Caring for nothing. How could he possibly have a gastric ulcer and look so hard and happy and strong. <em>What</em> was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber silently thinking? The doctors disappeared as soon as dinner was over, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber gravely rounding the door with some quiet formal phrases of politeness, and the group about the table broke up. He’s a bit pompous <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gunner was saying presently to someone from the hearthrug. Was he daring to speak of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber? Presently there were only the women left in the room. Miriam felt unable to depart and hung about until the table was cleared and sat down under the gas protected by her notebook. The room was very quiet. Sissie and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey were mending near a lamp at the far end of the table. Miriam’s thoughts left her suddenly. The tide of life had swept away leaving an undisturbed stillness, a space swept clear. She was empty and nothing. In all the clamour that had passed she had no part. In all the noise that lay ahead, no part. Strong people came and went and never ceased, coming and going and acting ceaselessly, coming and going, and here, at her centre, was nothing, lifeless thoughtless nothingness. The four men studied apart in the little room, away from the empty lifeless nothingness⁠ ⁠… the door opened quietly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey and Sissie looked expectantly up and were silent. Something had come into the room. Something real, clearing away the tumult and compelling peaceful silence. She exerted all her force to remain still and apparently engrossed, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> von Heber placed an open notebook and a large volume on the table exactly opposite to where she sat and sat down. He did not see that she was astonished at his coming nor her still deeper astonishment in the discovery of her unconscious certainty that he would come. A haunting familiar sense of unreality possessed her. Once more she was part of a novel; it was right, true like a book, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Heber to come in in defiance of everyone, bringing his studies into the public room in order to sit down quietly opposite this fair young English girl. He saw her apparently gravely studious and felt he could ‘pursue his own studies’ all the better for her presence. She began writing at random, assuming as far as possible the characteristics he was reading into her appearance. If only it were true; but there was not in the whole world the thing he thought he saw. Perhaps if he remained steadily like that in her life she could grow into some semblance of his steady reverent observation. He did not miss any movement or change of expression. Perhaps you need to be treated as an object of romantic veneration before you can become one. Perhaps in Canada there were old-fashioned women who <em>were</em> objects of romantic veneration all their lives, living all the time as if they were Maud or some other woman from Tennyson. It <em>was</em> glorious to have a real, simple homage coming from a man who was no simpleton, coming simple, strong and kindly from Canada to put you in a shrine.⁠ ⁠… I have always liked those old-fashioned stories because I have always known they were <em>true</em>. They have lived on in Canada. Canadian men have kept something that Englishmen are losing. She turned the pages of her notebook and came upon the scrap crossed through by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal. She read the words through forcing them to accept a superficial meaning. Disturbance about ideas would destroy the perfect serenity that was demanded of her. Be good sweet maid and let who will be clever. Easy enough if one were perpetually sustained by a strong and adoring hand. Perhaps more difficult really to be good than to be clever. Perhaps there were things in this strong man that were not perfectly good and serene. He exacted his own serenity by sheer force; that was why he worshipped and looked for natural serenity.⁠ ⁠… Presently she stirred from her engrossment and looked across at him as if only just aware of his presence. He did not meet her look but a light came on his face and he raised his head and turned towards the light to aid her observation. The things that are beginning to be called silly futile romances are true. Here <em>is</em> the strong silent man who does not want to talk and grin.⁠ ⁠… He would love laughter. Freed from worries and sustained by him one could laugh all one’s laughter out and dance and sing through life to a happy sunsetting.⁠ ⁠… Was he <em>religious</em>? She found she had risen to her feet with decision and began collecting her papers in confusion as if she had suddenly made a great clamour. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Heber rose at once and with some quiet murmuring remark went away from the room. Miriam felt she must get into the open and go far on and on and on. Going upstairs through the house and into her room for her outdoor things she found her own secret belongings more her own. In the life she shyly glanced at, out away somewhere in the bright blaze of Canadian sunshine her own secret belongings would be more her own. That was one of the secrets of the sheltered life⁠ ⁠… one of the things behind the smiles of the sheltered women; their own secret certainties intensified because they were surrounded; perhaps in Canada men respected the secret certainties of women which they could never share. With your feet on that firm ground what would it matter how life went on and on? There was someone in the hall. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal in a funny little short overcoat.</p>
				<p>“You go out Miss?” he said cheerfully.</p>
				<p>“I’m going for a walk,” she said eagerly, her eyes on the clear grey and black of the hat he was taking from the hall stand.</p>
				<p>“I too go for a walk” he murmured cramming the soft hat on to his resisting hair and opening the door for her.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">6</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent">This was one of those <em>mild</em> February days; it is a mistake to imagine that the winter is gone; but it is gone in your mind; you can see ahead two summers and only one winter. I go with you was meant as a question.⁠ ⁠… It was on the tip of her tongue to turn and say you should have said shall I go with you; she was rebuked by a glimpse of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal swinging sturdily unconsciously along on the gutter side of the narrow width of pavement, swinging his stick, the strong modelling of his white face unconscious under his strong black hair and the jaunty sweep of his black banded grey hat. “Jaunty and debonair”; but without a touch of weakness. What a lovely <em>mild</em> evening; extraordinary for the time of year; he would be furious at being interrupted for that, thinking of her as a stiff formal institutrice and shouting something ironic that would bring the world about their ears. Quel beau temps; that was it.</p>
				<p>“Quel <em>beau</em> temps.” They had reached the Gower Street curb and stood waiting to plunge through the passing traffic.</p>
				<p>“Une soirée superbe mademoiselle” shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal in a smooth flattened squeal as they crossed side by side; “hah-<em>eh</em>!” he squealed pushing her off to dart clear of a hansom and away to the opposite curb. Miriam pulled back just in time, receiving the angry yell of the driver full in her upturned face. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal was waiting unconcernedly outside the chemist’s, singing, with French words. She disposed hastily of the incident, eager to be walking on through the darkness towards the mingled darkness and gold of the coming streets. They went along past the grey heights of University College Hospital, separate creatures of mysteriously different races; she expected that when they reached the light she would find herself alone⁠—and swung with one accord round into the brilliance of the Tottenham Court Road; the tide of light and sound raising them into a companionship that needed no bending into shapes of conversation. It was something to him and it was something to her, and they threaded their way together, meeting and separating and rejoining, unanimous and apart. We are both <a id="corr-36"/>batteurs de pavé, she thought; both people who must be free to be nothing; saying to everything je m’en fiche⁠ ⁠… the hushed happiness that had begun in the dining-room half an hour ago seized her again suddenly, sending her forward almost on tiptoe. It was securely there; the vista it opened growing in beauty as she walked. There was some source of light within her, something that was ready to spread out all round her and ahead and flow over the past. It confirmed scenes she had read and wondered at and cherished, seeking in vain in the world for women who were like the women described in them. She understood what women in books meant by <em>sacred</em> “It is all too sacred for <em>words</em>.” There was no choice in all that; only secret and sacred beauty; unity with all women who had felt in the same way; the freedom of following certainties. Outside it was this other <a id="corr-37"/>self untouched and always new, her old free companion attending to no one. She tossed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal shreds of German or French whenever the increasing throng of passing pedestrians allowed them to walk for a moment side by side.</p>
				<p>His apparent oblivion of her incoherence gave full freedom to her delight in her collection of idioms and proverbs. Each one flung out with its appropriate emphasis and the right foreign intonation gave her a momentary change of personality. He caught the shreds and returned them woven into phrases increasing her store of convincing foreignness, comfortably, from the innocence of his polyglot experience, requiring no instructive contribution from her, reassuringly assuming her equal knowledge, his conscious response being only to her joyousness, his eyes wide ahead, his features moulded to gaiety. The burden of her personal dinginess and resourcelessness in a strong resourceful world was hidden by him because he was not aware of dinginess and resourcelessness anywhere. Dingy and resourceless she wandered along keeping as long as her scraps of convincing impersonation should hold out, to her equal companionship with his varied experience; bearing within her in secret unfathomable abundance the gift of ideal old-English rose and white gracious adorable womanhood given her by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Heber. At the turning into Oxford Street they lost each other. Miriam wandered in solitude amidst jostling bodies. The exhausted air rang with lifeless strident voices in shoutings and heavy thick flattened unconcerned speech; even from above a weight seemed to press. Clearer space lay ahead; but it was the clear space of Oxford Street and pressed upon her without ray or break. Once it had seemed part of the golden west-end; but Oxford Street was not the west-end. It was more lifeless and hopeless than even the north of London; more endurable because life was near at hand. Oxford Street was like a prison⁠ ⁠… the embarrassment of her enterprise came upon her suddenly; the gay going off was at an end; perhaps she might get away and back home alone up a side street. Amidst the shouting of women and the interwoven dark thick growlings of conversations she heard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal’s ironic snorting laugh not far behind her. Glancing round from the free space of darkness she had reached she saw him emerge shouldering from a group of women, short and square and upright and gleaming brilliantly with the remains of his laughter. A furious wrath flickered over her. He came forward with his eyes ahead unseeing, nearer, near, safe at her side, <em>her</em> little foreign <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal, mild and homely.</p>
				<p>Here is Ruscino’s mademoiselle, <em>all</em>ons, we will go to Ruscino <em>all</em>ons! Ruscino, in electric lights round the top of the little square portico, like the name of a play round the portico of a theatre, the sentry figure of the commissionaire, the passing glimpse of palm ferns standing in semidarkness just inside the portico, the darkness beyond, suddenly became a place, separate and distinct from the vague confusion of it in her mind with the Oxford Music Hall; offering itself, open before her, claiming to range itself in her experience; open, with her inside and the mysteries of the portico behind⁠ ⁠… continental London ahead of her, streaming towards her in mingled odours of continental food and wine, rich intoxicating odours in an air heavy and parched with the flavour of cigars, throbbing with the solid, filmy thrilling swing of music. It was a café! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal was evidently a habitué. She could be, by right of her happiness abroad. She was here as a foreigner, all her English friends calling her back from a spectacle she could not witness without contamination. Only Gerald knew the spectacle of Ruscino’s. “Lord, Ruscino’s; <em>Lord</em>.”⁠ ⁠… In a vast open space of light, set in a circle of balconied gloom, innumerable little tables held groups of people wreathed in a brilliancy of screened light, veiled in mist, clear in sharp spaces of light, clouded by drifting spirals of smoke. They sat down at right angles to each other at a little table under the central height. The confines of the room were invisible. All about them were worldly wicked happy people.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal">7</p>
				</header>
				<p class="noindent">She could understand a life that spent all its leisure in a café; every day ending in warm brilliance, forgetfulness amongst strangers near and intimate, sharing the freedom and forgetfulness of the everlasting unchanging café, all together in a common life. It was like a sort of dance, everyone coming and going poised and buoyant, separate and free, united in freedom. It was a heaven, a man’s heaven, most of the women were there with men, somehow watchful and dependent, but even they were forced to be free from troublings and fussings whilst they were there⁠ ⁠… the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest⁠ ⁠… she was there as a man, a free man of the world, a continental, a cosmopolitan, a connoisseur of women. That old man sitting alone with a grey face and an extinguished eye was the end of it, but even now the café held him up; he would come till death came too near to allow him movement. He was horrible, but less horrible than he would be alone in a room; he had to keep the rules and manage to behave; as long as he could come he was still in life.⁠ ⁠… White muslin wings on a black straw hat, a well-cut check costume and a carriage, bust forward, an elegant carriage imposing secrets and manners.⁠ ⁠… Miriam turned to watch her proceeding with a vague group of people through the central light towards the outer gloom. Voilà une petite qui est jolie she remarked judicially.⁠—Une jeune fille avec ses parents⁠—rebuked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal. Even he, wicked fast little foreigner did not know how utterly meaningless his words were. He was here, in Ruscino’s quite simply. He sat at home, at the height of his happy foreign expansiveness. He had no sense of desperate wickedness. He gave no help to the sense of desperate wickedness; pouring like an inacceptable nimbus from his brilliant strong head was a tiresome homeliness. She flung forth to the music, the shining fronds of distant palm ferns; sipped her liqueur with downcast eyes and thought of an evening along the digue at Ostend, the balmy air, the telescoping brilliant interiors of the villas, the wild arm-linked masquerading stroll, Elsie had really looked like an unprincipled Bruxelloise⁠ ⁠… foreigners were all innocent in their depravity.⁠ ⁠… To taste the joy of depravity one must be English.⁠ ⁠… Hah; Strelinsky! Ça va bien, hein? A figure had risen out of the earth at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal’s elbow and stood looking down at him; another foreigner. She glanced with an air of proprietorship; a slender man in a thin faded grey overcoat, a sharp greyish yellow profile and small thin head under a dingy grey felt hat. Strelinsky. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal stood sturdily up bowing with square outstretched hand, wrapped in the radiating beam of his smile. I present you <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Strelinsky. A musician. A composer of music. His social manner was upon him again; fatherliness, strong responsible hardworking kindliness. The face under the grey hat turned slowly towards her. She bowed and looked into eyes set far back in the thin mask of the face. Her eyes passed a question from the expressionless eyes to the motionless expressionless face. How could he be a composer; looking so⁠ ⁠… vanishing? Strelinsky⁠ ⁠… Morceau pour piano⁠ ⁠… that must be <em>he</em> standing here; did you write this she said abruptly and hummed the beginning. It sounded shapeless and toneless, but there was a little tune just ahead. She broke off short of it not sure that he was attending; the world burst into laughter; his face turned slowly and stopped looking downwards across her, his eyes fixed in a dead repetition of the laughter in which she was drowning. He stood in space in a faded coat and hat, a colourless figure clothed by her feebleness in lively dignity and wisdom⁠ ⁠… grouped inaccessibly beyond the vast space were solid tables filled with judges; dim figures stood in judgment in the amber light under the gallery where palms stood; she was drowning alone, surrounded by a distant circle of palms. Eleven. We must go miss stated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mendizabal cordially. Miriam rose. The tide of café life flowed all round her. She wandered blissfully out through the misty smoke-wreathed golden light, threading her way amongst the tables towards the black and gold of the streets. Far away behind her, staying in the evening, Strelinsky blocked the view, moving, fixed avertedly, with eyes in his shoulders along an endless narrowing distance of café.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
